
RESEARCH
Rising inequality: A major issue of our time
Zia Qureshi May 16, 2023


Income and wealth inequality has risen in many countries in recent decades. Rising inequality and related disparities and anxieties have been stoking social discontent and are a major driver of the increased political polarization and populist nationalism that are so evident today. An increasingly unequal society can weaken trust in public institutions and undermine democratic governance. Mounting global disparities can imperil geopolitical stability. Rising inequality has emerged as an important topic of political debate and a major public policy concern.


High and rising inequality


Current inequality levels are high. Contemporary global inequalities	are close to the
peak levels observed in the early 20th century, at the end of the prewar era (variously described as the Belle Époque or the Gilded Age) that saw sharp increases in global inequality.


Over the past four decades, there has been a broad trend of rising income inequality across countries. Income inequality has risen in most advanced economies and major emerging economies, which together account for about two-thirds of the world's population and 85 percent of global GDP (Figure 1). The increase has been particularly large in the United States, among advanced economies, and in China, India, and Russia, among major emerging economies.

Figure 1. Inequality has risen in most advanced and major emerging economies
Richest 10% income share, 1980-2020






(https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/Screen-Shot-2023-05-16- at-3.09.18-PM.png)






(https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/Screen-Shot-2023-05-16- at-3.09.42-PM.png)


Source: Author, using data from World Inequality Database	.
Note: Pre-tax national income. Some data points are extrapolated.


Beyond these groups of countries, the trend in the developing world at large has been more mixed, but many countries have seen increases in inequality. In regions such as Latin America, the Middle East and North Africa, and sub-Saharan Africa, income inequality levels on average have been relatively more stable, but inequality was already at high levels in these regions-the highest in the world.


Wealth inequality within countries is typically much higher than income inequality. It has followed a rising trend across countries since around 1980, similar to income

inequality. Higher wealth inequality capital income and inheritance.

feeds higher future income inequality through



The increase in inequality has been especially marked at the top end of the income distribution, with the income share of the top 10 percent (and even more so that of the

top 1 percent) rising sharply in many countries. This was so particularly up to the global financial crisis of 2008-09. Those in low- and middle-income groups have suffered a loss of income share, with those in the bottom 50 percent typically experiencing larger losses of income share. These trends in inequality have been associated with an erosion of the middle class and a decline in intergenerational
mobility	, especially in advanced economies experiencing larger increases in
inequality and a greater polarization in income distribution.


While within-country inequality has been rising, inequality between countries (reflecting per capita income differences) has been falling in recent decades. Faster- growing emerging economies, especially the large ones such as China and India, have been narrowing the income gap with advanced economies. Global inequality-the sum of within-country and between-country inequality-has declined somewhat since around 2000, with the fall in between-country inequality more than offsetting the rise in within-country inequality. As within-country inequality has been rising, it now accounts for a much larger part of global inequality (about two-thirds in 2020, up from less than half in 1980). Looking ahead, how within-country inequality evolves will matter even more for global inequality.

The interplay between the evolution of within-country inequality and between-country inequality, coupled with the differential growth performance of emerging and advanced economies, in recent decades presents an interesting picture of middle-
class dynamics at the global level (as depicted by the well-known "elephant curve	" of the incidence of global economic growth). It shows, for the period since 1980, a rising middle class in the emerging world and a squeezed middle class in rich
countries. It also shows an increasing concentration of income at the very top of the income distribution globally.


Drivers of rising inequality


Shifting economic paradigms (https://www.brookings.edu/book/shifting-paradigms/) are altering distributional dynamics. Transformative technological change, led by digital technologies, has been reshaping markets, business models, and the nature of work in ways that can increase inequality within economies. While the specifics differ across countries, this has been happening broadly through three channels: more unequal distribution of labor income with rising wage inequality as technology shifts

labor demand from routine low- to middle-level skills to new, higher-level skills; shift of income from labor to capital with increasing automation and a decoupling of wages from firm profitability; and more unequal distribution of capital income with rising market power and economic rents enjoyed by dominant firms in increasingly concentrated and winner-takes-all markets. These dynamics are more evident in advanced economies but could increasingly impact developing economies as the new technologies favoring capital and higher-level skills make deeper inroads there.


Globalization (international trade, offshoring) also has contributed to rising inequality within economies, especially in advanced economies by negatively affecting wages and jobs of lower-skilled workers in tradable sectors. These sectors increasingly extend beyond manufacturing as digital globalization expands the range of activities, including services, deliverable across borders.


In emerging economies, technology is reshaping how international trade affects national inequality. The new technologies, born in advanced economies, are shifting manufacturing and global value chains toward higher capital and skill intensity.
Leading manufacturing firms located in emerging economies and engaged in exporting are adopting these technologies in order to be able to compete, diminishing employment generation and wage growth prospects for less-skilled workers from this higher-productivity segment of industry in economies whose factor endowments would warrant less capital- and skill-intensive technologies-and thus limiting the potential of international trade to reduce inequality within these economies by boosting demand for their more abundant factor endowment (less-skilled workers).
Meanwhile, smaller firms that absorb most such workers in these economies remain engaged in low-productivity activities, many in the informal economy and in petty service sectors.


Globalization has been a force in recent decades for reducing inequality between economies by expanding export opportunities for emerging economies and spurring their economic growth. But globalization's role in promoting international economic convergence faces new challenges as technological change alters production processes and trade patterns (more on this below).


Other broad trends in recent decades affecting the distribution of income and wealth include changes in institutional settings such as economic deregulation, increasing

financialization of economies coupled with a high concentration of financial income and wealth, and erosion of labor market institutions such as minimum wage laws and collective bargaining. Moreover, the redistributive role of the state has been weakening with declining tax progressivity and with transfer programs facing the pressure of tighter fiscal constraints.


Role of public policy

Large and persistent increases in inequality within economies are not an inevitable consequence of forces such as technological change and globalization. Much depends on how public policy responds to the new dynamics that these forces generate. In the midst of these common forces of change, the rise in inequality has been uneven across countries. The difference lies largely in countries' institutional and policy settings and how they have responded. In general, looking across countries, public policy has been behind the curve. It has been slow to rise to the new challenges to promote more inclusive outcomes from economic change.


Public policy to reduce inequality is often viewed narrowly in terms of redistribution?taxes and transfers. This is indeed an important element, especially in view of the erosion of the state's redistributive role in recent decades. But there is a much broader policy agenda (https://www.brookings.edu/research/an-inclusive- future-technology-new-dynamics-and-policy-challenges/) of "predistribution" that can make the growth process itself more inclusive and produce better market outcomes-by promoting wider access to new opportunities for firms and workers and enhancing their capabilities to adjust as market dynamics shift.


This latter agenda of reforms spans competition policy and regulatory frameworks to keep markets competitive and inclusive in the digital age; innovation ecosystems and technology policies to put innovation to work for broader groups of people; digital infrastructure and literacy to reduce the digital divide; education and (re)training programs to upskill and reskill workers while addressing inequalities in access to these programs; and labor market policies and social protection systems to enable workers to obtain a fair share of economic returns and to support them in times of transition. In many of these reform areas, the new dynamics that economies are facing call for fresh thinking and significant policy overhaul.

Outlook for inequality

Absent more responsive policies to combat inequality, the current high levels of inequality are likely to persist or even rise further. Artificial intelligence and related new waves of digital technologies and automation could increase inequality further within countries. Even as new technologies increase productivity and produce greater economic affluence, and new jobs and tasks emerge to replace those displaced and so prevent large technological unemployment, inequality could reach much higher levels. The economic fallout of the COVID-19 pandemic (https://www.brookings.edu/research/tackling-the-inequality-pandemic-is-there-a- cure/) has reinforced some of the inequality-increasing dynamics. Also, a high and increasing concentration of wealth can exacerbate income inequality in a mutually reinforcing cycle.


Technological change also poses new challenges to global economic convergence that has reduced inequality between countries in the past couple of decades. Faster growth in emerging economies led by export of manufactures has depended greatly on their comparative advantage in labor-intensive manufacturing based on large populations of low-skill, low-wage workers. This source of comparative advantage increasingly will erode as automation of low-skill work expands. Emerging economies face the challenge of recalibrating their growth models as technology disrupts traditional pathways to growth and development.


Emerging economies' growth prospects	also face other headwinds, including the
scarring effects of the pandemic and global supply chain disruptions exacerbated by the war in Ukraine and an unsettled global geopolitical environment, which would hit the more trade-dependent economies harder. If growth in emerging economies falters, the decline in between-country inequality will slow, which could stall or even reverse the modest decline in global inequality observed since about 2000 if within-country inequality continues to mount.


Climate change is another factor that could worsen inequality within and between countries. Low-income groups and countries are more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and have less capacity to cope with them.

Conclusion

Income and wealth inequality is elevated. In the absence of policies to counter recent trends, inequality could rise to still higher levels. High and rising inequality entails adverse economic, social, and political consequences. Policymakers must pay more attention to the changing distributional dynamics in the digital age and harness the

forces of change for more inclusive prosperity. History
unabated rises in inequality can end up badly.


AUTHOR

tells us that large and






Zia Qureshi Senior Fellow - Global Economy and
Development  m-zia-qureshi






The Brookings Institution is committed to quality, independence, and impact.
We are supported by a diverse array of funders (/about-us/annual-report/) . In line with our values and policies (/about-us/research-independence-and-integrity-policies/) , each Brookings publication represents the sole views of its author(s).

Copyright 2026 The Brookings Institution










Global Economic Change and Inequality
Md Nazmus Sadekin, Md Muhibbullah, Md. Mahmudul Alam


 To cite this version:
Md Nazmus Sadekin, Md Muhibbullah, Md. Mahmudul Alam. Global Economic Change and Inequal- ity. Walter Leal Filho; Anabela Marisa Azul; Luciana Brandli; Amanda Lange Salvia; Pinar Gökcin Özuyar; Tony Wall. Reduced Inequalities, Springer International Publishing, 2021, Encyclopedia of the UN Sustainable Development Goals, 978-3-319-71060-0. 10.1007/978-3-319-71060-0_51-1 . hal- 03520099





HAL Id: hal-03520099
https://hal.science/hal-03520099v1
Submitted on 10 Jan 2022




   HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub- lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research centers.
   
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

GLOBAL ECONOMIC CHANGE AND INEQUALITY


Md Nazmus Sadekin
Department of Economics
Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University Tangail-1902, Bangladesh
E-mail: sadekin08@gmail.com
Md Muhibbullah*
Department of Economics
Faculty of Economics and Management Sciences International Islamic University Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
E-mail: muhibedu@gmail.com

Md. Mahmudul Alam
School of Economics, Finance and Banking Universiti Utara Malaysia
Kedah, Malaysia
E-mail: rony000@gmail.com


*Corresponding Author




Citation Reference:

Sadekin M.N., Muhibullah, M., Alam, M.M. (2021). Global Economic Change and Inequality. In: Walter Leal Filho et al. (eds), Reduced Inequalities: Encyclopedia of the UN Sustainable Development Goals. Springer, Cham. ISBN: 978-3-319-71060-0. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3-319-71060-0_51-1




This is a pre-publication copy.

The published article is copyrighted by the publisher.

GLOBAL ECONOMIC CHANGE AND INEQUALITY

Definition

Global economic change includes economic restructuring, globalisation, technological changes, changes in labour market institutions, and spread of World culture and ideas. Though, the term inequality is very subjective, here inequality indicates the state of not being equal, regarding in rights, in status, as well as in opportunities which stands very much at the core of different social justice theories. Moreover, in their research many authors have distinguished “economic inequality”, mostly meaning as “income inequality”, “monetary inequality” or, “inequality in living conditions”. Additionally, economic inequality varies among societies, among different historical periods, among diverse economic structures as well as systems. This chapter discusses global economic change in terms of globalisation.

Introduction

In recent decades, processes of post industrialization, economic restructuring, and globalization have been transforming the landscape of social and economic inequalities in general (Wade, 2003), and in urban settings in particular (Baum, 1997; Fainstein, 1990; Sassen, 1990, 1991, 1998; Waldinger, 1996). The role of cities as strategic sites in the globalization process and as arenas of economic transformation is central in the literature of globalization and economic restructuring (Fainstein, 2001; Sassen, 1988, 1998). Globalization, poverty and inequality are all so omnipresent and often ambiguous that they need to be defined.

Globalisation, Inequality, and Poverty

Capital literature flows from the rich to the poor countries in the periphery, otherwise known as globalization, from before the end of the nineteenth century. The narrow definition of "globalization" means a greater integration of national economies into the global economy (Bordo et al., 2007). It comprises both processes and results. Processes are economic changes- liberalization of trade and capital markets and technological transition, such as cheaper and improved telecommunications and IT (Schjolden, 1999).
Globalization is the mechanism by which commerce and cultural exchange become gradually interconnected with the world (Leidner, 2010). Globalization has increased goods and services demand. The largest corporations in many countries are no longer domestic businesses, they are multinationals with subsidiaries (BBC, 2020). The near effects represent lower barriers to international flows of goods, capital, labour, technology, and ideas which ultimately increase international trade, which means that the local, regional and national economies are more integrated into the global market. Local economies are more vulnerable to global economic forces and are more impacted by them (O'Brien & Leichenko, 2000). A wider one that refers to the growing position of domestic and foreign market forces to assess goods and services distribution, expenditure and output and specific socio-economic outcomes. This expanded concept encompasses changes to domestic policy such as privatization and deregulation. For several reasons, globalization has become an important policy issue. As a process, it has been significantly accelerated since the 1980s, especially, for developing countries, driven mainly by trade (current account) and the liberalization of capital accounts (Dollar, 2001). Globalization has profoundly influenced so many areas, as shown in Figure 1.


Figure 1: Digital Image of Globalisation (Radhakrishnan, 2009)

      Figure 1 shows that globalization has profoundly influenced the world and our day-to- day lives. The main cause of globalization is an increase in competition between companies. There are several factors leading to this problem (Weebly, n.d).
1. Countries that didn't have advanced manufacturing industries rapidly evolved in particular China and countries that used to import many of the goods they needed. They are now developing their own manufacturing sectors, which allows them to export more and import less than ever before. As a result, global rivalry is intensifying.
2. There were no handsets, smartphones or laptops 20 years ago. Most importantly, people were not provided with the internet. There was also very little contact among the people, that is why globalization was not always the case in the past. But now, with technological advances and internet access, connectivity in any part of the world is no longer a challenge for the people of modern times. It has made it easier for the world to compare prices and products not only globally, but internationally.
3. The security of industry has been reduced because of FTAs and economic unions. Consumers are thus able to purchase goods and access services without any import restrictions from other countries.
      It is important to address the range of inequalities regimes, the nature of major institutional areas and the relationship between inequality or difference when dealing with multiple social inequalities in an analysis of the global process (Walby, 2009). Every series of social inequality relation is best understood as a system of inequality regime. Economics, crime, politics and civil society are also relevant while the primary institutional domain is regarded in terms of global inequalities (Kaldor, 2013).
      In the international community of development there is increasing consensus that inequality and poverty must be regarded as multifaceted, including not only wealth but health, education and even civil and political freedoms as well. Increased inequality has caused many major problems affecting every country and its citizens. As capital is overwhelmingly concentrated in the hands of a limited number of individuals, global wealth inequalities are increased (Gottfredson, 2004). Furthermore, these issues lead to multiple problems between different ethnic groups and population divisions, not just in developing countries but also in the richest countries of the world. These papers sometimes include other indicators of well-

being, but largely for reasons of brevity, generally use the more narrow income definitions of poverty, $1 or $2 per day per person, the measures now embedded in international targets of halving income poverty by 2015 (Gentilini & Sumner, 2013). Income inequality is usually measured with Gini coefficients, upper to lower quartile/quintile/decile ratios and other statistical measures to summarise inequality within an entire population with a single number (Richard, 2003).
      Globalisation in certain countries can be both a threat and a benefit to some businesses. In reality, many people's living standards are boosted. At the same time, though, people are still being drawn deeper into poverty. Not everybody who suffers from poverty is getting worse due to globalization. As globalization rising, market rivalry is growing. A business needs to be expanded to enhance its production output. To order to do so, they need more employment and that gives poor families a chance to live (Mayer, 1997; DeLuca et al., 2019). Some businesses, particularly small enterprises and third world countries, got worse as a result of globalisation. A failure to improve an invention leads to lower production profits than other firms (Vandenberg & Creation, 2006). As a result, the businesses benefiting from the globalization are not able to keep up. The workers then lose their jobs, which affects their everyday lives.

Dimensions of Globalisation

Globalization is a dominant element of the modern world economy and one of the most important powers to decide the future direction of the world. In the course of the years, globalisation has been given various meanings, which have reached the point at which the verb "to globalize" was introduced for the first time in 1944 (Teubner, 2004). Previously only "global" and "globalization" concepts existed. Globally, the extension of the various links between cities is understood, creating a new phenomenon, but a special attribute as well. The conceptions of the "World Space" or the definition of the "World Geographical Space" are introduced, which remove the misleading effects of distances between cities and connect to each other (Entrikin, 1991). Globalization has been driven by the implementation of global technology in the field of geography that has contributed both to the physical expansion of new resources and to an rise in global sources and in the effect of global forces on local lives. In the context of globalisation, the big moments and powers of globalization mark the transition and the reference points. It has manifold dimensions: economic, political, security, environmental, health, social, cultural, and others. The dimensions of globalisation are shown in figure 2.


Figure 2: Dimensions of Globalisation (Mazilu, 2010)

      Globalization seeks to improve the efficiency of markets around the world, increase competition, reducing military conflicts and distribute resources in a more equitable manner. There are both positive and negative aspects to globalization that are due to its competitive impact and that a number of negative aspects that can potentially lead to conflict could be offset by international or global cooperation through policy agreements or the development of new international institutions. A globalization can lead to foreign conflicts, it also can lead to its control by beneficial competitive effects and the ability of global collaboration to resolve the planet 's economic and other challenges (Intriligator, 2004).
      Intriligator (2004) summarized some of the gains associated with globalization in his paper "Globalization of the World Economy," outlining some specific challenges that should be discussed by governments and investors. Some of the benefits of globalisation including Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), Technological Innovation, Economies of Scale etc. FDI tends to grow at a much higher rate than growth in global trading, helping to boost technology transfer, industrial restructuring, and growth for global companies. Increased global competition helps stimulate the creation of new technologies, particularly with FDI growth, which contributes to improving economic performance by making processes more efficient. Globalization allows major businesses to achieve cost- and price control economies of scale, which in turn promote more economic development. This will, however, affect several small businesses that seek to compete at domestically.
      On the other hand, interdependence between nations, national sovereignty, equity distribution are the some negative issues of globalisation. Interdependency between countries can lead to regional or global instability if local economic fluctuations eventually impact many countries that rely on them. Many see the emergence of nation-states, multinationals and global companies as a challenge to sovereignty. In the end, some leaders may become nationalistic or xenophobic. The advantages of globalisation, thereby generating greater economic inequalities, are overwhelmingly biased against rich countries or individuals. Writing in the Milken Institute's quarterly analysis by the end of 2017, Rodrik (2017) concluded that globalization needs to be rebalanced in order to regain more jobs and its employment and earnings stability needs and focus internationally on where economic progress can be made.
      Globalisation has facets that also contribute to challenges and cause for concern alongside the benefits and progressive changes that carry to the nation-state level. Some of the world's problems like atmospheric warming, the ozone layer hole and cutting of rainforests show the globalization phenomenon in the most impressive way, because the global problems require a global approach. Naturally there are national and local problems in the field of the environment (Sadekin & Muhibbullah, 2020), but they have an over-border aspect, such as river pollution. There are other conditions not related to the concepts of time and space. For example, it depends on the actions of the world's population, particularly of developing countries, that is, the survival of very small island countries forming the organization AOSIS that have been severely under threat of continued growth on sea level. This also applies to people who rely heavily on the environment such as livelihood fishing (Sadekin et al., 2018a; 2018b; 2018c).
      As to the social aspect of globalisation, the planet has become a 'global village,' creative communication networks that connect to the traditional communities (through chat, e-mails etc.) like families or neighbourhoods at great distances. Still, these traditional communication fields cannot be replaced, to name just one example within the social dimension.
      There are big issues with the political aspect. Globalization and competition at local level limits national politics, many problems cannot be properly solved, but can be solved internationally and globally. New types and new political contexts must therefore be sought.

European integration is seen as a successful response to all the globalization challenges. At regional and national level, politics has endured, and still has, the unregulated and dematerialised economy practiced increasingly, domestically and globally. This fundamental imbalance also threatens capitalism, which is a factor of social status. However, not everything related to globalization is true. Politicians also use globalization as a form of scapegoat and as a justification mechanism with different uses. This is particularly clear if we consider examples from the political sphere that do not cross globalization at any point.

Globalisation and Economic Growth
The impact of globalisation on economic output is a concern of economists and researchers from developed countries as well as from developing ones.
      Globalisation, including its components, affects economic growth in well-developed countries (OECD countries) differently: in the short term the influence is weak, while in the longer term the connections from general, financial and social globalization to economic growth are established (Chang & Lee , 2010). According to Polasek and Sellner (2011) globalization had a positive effect on regional growth in the European Union (EU-27) countries. The rates of economic growth in these countries are increasing as globalization grows in Malaysia, Thailand, India and the Philippines too (Rao et al., 2011).
      Globalisation is clearly relevant to economic growth in terms of economic, social and political indices. In these perspectives, a study by Ying et al. (2014) found that economic globalization has a positive impact on economic growth in the 10 ASEAN Member States, whereas social and political globalization has negative effects. This result strongly supported by Olimpia and Stela (2017) for economic globalisation and social globalisation but opposite results for political globalisation for Romania. Economic growth in well-developed countries (OECD countries) is distinct, including its elements, from globalization. The effect is low in the short term, while in the long term there is a correlation from general, cultural and social globalization to economic growth (Chang & Lee 2010). Globalization has greatly impacted regional development in the European Union (EU-27), according to Polasek and Sellner (2011). When globalization rises in Malaysia, Thailand, India and the Philippines, these countries are also growing economic growth rates (Rao et al., 2011). Some other studies found positive relationship between globalisation and political governance on economic growth through financial development and FDI (Fuinhas et al., 2019; Sadekin et al., 2015; Shittu et al., 2020). However, globalisation can impact a country’s economic growth through various channels of which some are positive and some are negative. For instance, through technological innovation, FDI, economies of scale can impact economic growth positively which are shown in yellow colour in figure 3. Moreover, channels like inequitable distribution, interdependency, and threat to sovereignty can impact economic growth negatively. These are shown as pink in figure 3.


Figure 3: Globalisation and it’s impact on economic growth (Kuepper, 2020)
Winners vs Losers

Economic theory and empirical analysis are generally accepted on the optimistic net welfare impact of international economic integration. Nevertheless, globalization causes competition between winners and losers. Economic studies have so far cantered on the impact of increasing foreign trade on the labour market (David et al. 2013, Dauth et al. 2014, Pierce and Schott 2016). While these studies found that exposure to trade with low-wage countries creates labour market instability in high-wage countries, they also show that the positive effects of trade on the labour market outweigh the negative. However, in economic analysis the political implications of this growth have been largely overlooked.
      Recently, research articles have begun researching the political implications of growing foreign trade, motivated by the emergence of right-wing populism across Europe and by the rising polarization of US policy. Most work centres on the United States and explores the reactions of elected officials to the increasing resistance to globalisation by citizens (Feigenbaum and Hall, 2015; Jensen et al., 2016; Che et al., 2016; Dorn et al., 2016). The results indicate that politicians adjust their positions in favour of less liberal policies, especially protectionist policies. In a recent article, we use German data to analyse who takes the vote against globalisation (Dippel et al., 2015). This enables us to also clarify why voters are increasingly demanding populist policies. These issues were listed in Table 1.
Table 1: Winners vs Losers of Globalisation
Winners
Losers
> Economies with low-labor market and manufacturing services to export.
> The manufacturing industry in countries with high costs of labour.
> New middle class in developing and growing economies.
> The regions e.g. 'rust belt,' which has been seen a decrease in jobs.
> Economic benefit for exporters.
> Structural unemployment with previous manual laborers.
> Employees that are working in the export industries.
> Poorest 5% that had declining wages.
> Trained and professional employees have the opportunity to increase wages.
> Environmental impact of better productivity, trade and development.
> Global companies that profit from tax avoidance and externalization.
> Countries that are land-locked unable to grow export industries.
> Workers worthy of switching to higher- income economies.
> Economic and social burdens from migration.
Dimensions of Inequality

The gap between rich and poor is widening rather than narrowing. According to a Pew Global survey, 77 per cent of Malaysians agreed that it's a major challenge of being the gap between the rich and poor (CompareHero, 2018). A global median of 60% says that the difference between rich and poor in their nation is a very large issue. There is much greater concern in developed economies and emerging markets (median 60% in each) but also in advanced economies (56%) (Pew Research Centre, 2014). Rich individuals and households from business, politics and celebrity culture live in a comfortable and prestigious elite world of pleasure and power. While millions of children are hungry, tens of thousands of women are subjected to domestic violence and poorly paid survivors. There are powerful institutions, customs, and ideologies behind these strong interpersonal contrasts, each strongly implicit in inequality structures. This circumstance creates pain and suffering, societal criticism and confrontation, and for others a deeper sense of religious outrage. One crucial argument to illustrate at the outset is that inequality is both global and regional. We often consider inequality to be a characteristic of individual countries.
      A new report from published by Oxfam, shows the increasing rate of the disparity between rich and poor which is shown in Figure 4 (Oxfam, 2018). For instance, the wealthiest 26 individuals in the world today have the same wealth as the poorest half of humanity. During 2018, the combined fortunes of billionaires worldwide increased by an average of $2.5 billion daily. In the meanwhile, almost half of humanity spends less than $5.50 a day on wages or the relation of local purchasing strength. Racial and class differences are interwoven in.

Figure 4: Inequality between rich and poor by Oxfam (Stilwell, 2019)

      There is further division in developing markets. Pluralities in nine of the 25 countries surveyed by the Pew Research Center (2014) have blamed their government for inequality in their country, with roughly four out of ten or more in Ukraine (45%), India (45%), Lebanon

(43%), China (43%), Tunisia (43%), Turkey (42%) and Nigeria (39%). In the meantime, pluralities in another six countries, claim that workers' salaries are the primary scapegoat. Latin Americans – including Brazilians (44%), Chileans (39%) and Colombians (39%) are more likely to blame inadequate take-home pay for the gap between the rich and poor.
      Citizens in developing economies are often torn by accusing the government for the income disparities and the workers' incomes being criticised. In Kenya (36%), Ghana (29%), and Tanzania (29%), inequality is a fault of their government, and Salvadorans (32%) tend to blame the amount paid to employees. Almost equal percentage in the Palestinian territories, also Bangladesh, Senegal and Uganda point out that the government and wages are the culprits for the inequality. Nicaragua is the country with the highest percentage (31%) that says there is a shortage of hard work (Pew Research Centre, 2014).
      Nevertheless, there are significant differences within and across countries in terms of employment, education, health and social involvement. Many assume that social disparities are indeed partly the product of globalization. It suggests that the levels of global inequality will worsen unless globalization is radically reformed or countered by certain alternative social institutions. In fact, it is becoming increasingly clear that the magnitude of global disparity threatens the credibility of the financial system and its organisation by foreign economies, businesses, and systems of government. It was discussed at the World Economic Forum in Davos in January 2014. A variety of influential people have expressed social conflict and increasing pressure to control global business through governments (Kennedy and Martinuzzi, 2014).
      Then global inequality is an extreme issue. The notion of extreme inequality is one way of summing up this, proposed by Pogge (2002, 2007). t requires the following five elements:
(i) in absolute terms, the deterioration is very severe, evident in bad health and susceptibility to food insecurity; (ii) in relative terms, too, as the gap between rich and poor is widening; (iii) it is impossible for very poor citizens to change their position; (iv) Inequalities are multidimensional, and impact not only the income but all facets of life; and (v) inequality is avoidable because it could potentially be easier for the poor to be moved.
      The American economist Simon Kuznets (1955) has over time established an inverted U-shaped hypothesis of inequality progression. Kuznets claims that early periods of industrialization saw comparatively small income inequality in pre-industrial society with the majority disadvantaged, but intensified again in the 20th century with expanded education and state allocation of wealth. It has been a significant intellectual frame of reference in the subsequent discussions. As other economists, Kuznets stresses sales as the cornerstone to recognizing inequality. That is because income is an essential tool for access to a variety of support services, including health and education, food, clothes and shelter. It can also be measured, at least for societies that carry out statistics and can afford to collect them. Economic openness to exchange, deregulated economies and competitive financial services are seen as a gateway to growing incentives and revenue worldwide. The key issue is the overwhelming evidence that rising income inequality is that both across countries and over several countries over the long term.
      Although there is an economic case for injustice, it is not socially desirable. Under the rule of law, if we encourage capitalism to go on, injustice will create significant cultural, social and political issues. With increasing inequality, the rest would be dissatisfied with the sum relative to the top 10 per cent, as taxes are mostly cantered on the most efficient (or privileged) portion of the community (Holton, 2014). Milanovic (2011) calculates that the top 10 percent receive 56 percent of the world 's income while the bottom 10 percent receive 0.7 percent. When allowances are made between rich and poor countries for different price levels, the relative share of the top group will expand and contracts will be made further in the bottom group, which will worse the ration in the process.

Economic Growth and Inequality

Inequality of income is a core feature of contemporary society, a central subject of social stratification and labour market study, a major cause of political tension in many countries and the target of a lot of intellectual debate and prescriptive reasoning (e.g. Blau & Duncan, 1967; Franklin et al., 2009, Rawls, 1971; Sen, 1973).
      Galbraith (2011) explains since 1963 the emergence of inequalities in the global economy and the connection between wealth, growth, democratic regimes and efficient income distribution. Since 1971, the migration of inequality between countries has shown a consistent popular trend across countries, indicating that shifts in the intersectoral terms of trade and world interest rates were important. Commodity prices and global monetary policy effects therefore appear critical to changing global inequality. Galbraith (2011) has noted that democratic systems matter: forms of equitable systems have lower disparity measurements after accounting for economic factors, areas and adjustments over time.
      A significant subject in macroeconomics is the relation between aggregate production and income distribution (Galor, 2011). The position played by income disparity in economic development has also lately attracted substantial coverage in political circles and in the mainstream. For example, the World Bank Organization has listed eradicating severe poverty and raising wages from the bottom 40 per cent of developing countries as a core global target for growth. The IMF has weighed in with the debate on the position and the impact of economic growth of income distribution (see for example Ostry et al. 2014). Lederman (2015) began his analysis on the grounds that changes in income inequality may differ between rich and poor countries per capita for GDP. This premise is based on theory of economics. In a main intervention, Galor and Zeira (1993) presented a model that demonstrated credit system imperfections and expenditure indivisibility to prove that discrimination has short-term and long-term consequences for GDP per capita. The Galor and Zeira models predict that the effect of increasing inequality on GDP per capita is negative in relatively rich nations but positive in poor nations. Lederman (2015) has found that, on average, an increase of 1 percent point of the Gini coefficient reduces GDP per capita by around 1.1% over five years; the long-term (cumulative) effect is higher and is about -4.5%.
      A monograph by Borland et al. (2001) is an analysis on the regional phenomenon, which reflects on unemployment and wages and on the growing disparity in the labour market in Australia. They found that over the past 10 years, average real incomes over Australia have increased and land and capital prices have boomed. However, there have also been decreased incomes and increased dependence on the social support program among certain people and communities.
      Living standards are somewhat different across various locations in today's world. Yet over time they have evolved too: working environments improved drastically in certain areas, slower in others. In the midst of these major global changes and inequalities, our individual stories largely decide how healthy, wealthy and educated each of us is in our own lives. These factors influence us. It's all about our own hard work and life choices. Yet as the evidence indicates, they are far less relevant than the one aspect we do not have any power over: where and when we are raised. This single, absolutely arbitrary aspect defines essentially the circumstances under which we live our lives.
      Today's global inequality of opportunity means that good or bad luck in your place of birth is what matters most in your living conditions. The inequality between countries focused by Roser (2013) that it is not the only aspect to be considered. In countries and cultures, disparities - ethnic variations, racial gaps, class differences and inequality in various

dimensions - are often high and these are outside the reach of each person and unfair in the same way.
      Concluding remarks stated by Roser (2013) in his writing on “Global Economic Inequality” are as follows:
a) As Atkinson (2015) has noted, "We ought to look at the inequalities of result today because we are worried about equity of opportunities tomorrow."
b) The growing imbalance in opportunities in today's society is the product in structural disparities of wellness, income, employment and many other factors of our lives.
c) Your conditions are determined far more by what is beyond your control – the place and time in which you are born – than by your own efforts, your dedication and your life's choices.
d) This is not appropriate whether the randomness of a child's conception dictates the prospects of life, employment or surviving without deprivation. We must stop this injustice so that children with the best living conditions are born as likely as in Europe or North America, in Sub-Saharan Africa.
e) The inequality we see today in the world is the result of unfair progress. Our generation has a chance – and I believe its responsibility – to enable every part of the world to develop and become a place where health, access to education and prosperity are a reality.
f) The achievements in the past and the tremendous disparity of the world today reflect what is feasible for the future. The quotation from William Gibson "the future is already here, it's just unevenly spread," is valid for the human development cycle and a clear roadmap for what is likely in any region of the future.
g) We focus at Our World in Data on "data and research to advance against the biggest world problems" (this is our mission), and one of them is global inequality.
h) Once we are aware of what is possible, we can not surely accept today's brutal reality that it is the place where a child is born which defines its chance of survival. In our new series on child mortality, the research shows how this is possible.
i) It was right for Mahatma Gandhi that he said, "The difference between what we do and what we can do is enough to solve most of the world's problems."


Global Economic Inequality

While spatial inequalities are integral to global social divisions, there are comparatively few accounts which link past inequalities to those of the present. Much public commentary on global inequality reaches straight for the latest evidence or stories about inequality attributing current problems and crises simply to contemporary institutions and activities. This has the merit of being relevant and topical. Yet it forecloses on some very important questions about long-term rather than short-term patterns and explanations of inequality.
      Understanding the causes of economic inequality is critical for achieving equitable economic development. To investigate the recent evolution of economic inequality, many researchers conducted their study for different country and regions for different aspects.
      Researchers found many causes to vary the global economic inequality. Deffenbaugh and Burke (2019) identified that global warming has increased the global economic inequality. They found that global warming has very likely exacerbated global economic inequality.

According to them, over the past half century between-country inequality in population-weight has been increased almost 25%. This increase results from the impact of warming on annual economic growth, which has accumulated robust declines in economic output in hotter, poorer countries. Thus, the global warming caused by fossil fuel use has likely exacerbated the economic inequality associated with historical disparities in energy consumption.
      Development may take place with increasing inequality (Gagliani, 1987). Today's developed (Western) countries were supposedly mainly influenced by a tight labour market, education expansion and democracy. All this materialized as the share of farm labour had decreased significantly. On LDCs, neither of them can be pushed. Similarly, Chiswick (1971) investigated the impact of the degree of economic growth and the pace of economic development on income disparities in the consumer economy. A human capital model is used, which assumes that proportional wage disparity rises with economic growth, ceteris paribus.
      Sumner (2017) discussed a distributive conflict in their article, which they described as the ‘developer’s dilemma’. In fact, the problem or challenge is that developed nations follow two possibly incompatible growth targets. i.e (i) Economic development by structural transformation and efficiency growth centred on the reallocation of economic activities within and across the sectors, and (ii) Inclusive growth usually described as strong economic growth that is especially advantageous to the poorer in society. Where the first criteria ‘structural transformation’ was planned to expand inequalities. Although the above means equitable development that stable or even declining inequality is important to distribute development gains broadly. The ‘developer’s dilemma’ is thus a distribution conflict that forms the nucleus of economic development.
      The Lewis economic development model was chosen by Sumner (2017) because it is based on structural transformation for the economic development and therefore ideally fits in with the structural transformation study and how inclusive growth interacts with structural transformation. The original rise in disparity was expected by Lindert and Williamson (2003). In this context, although Lewis and Kuznets envisaged a downswing, Lindert and Williamson (2003) suggested that inequality tends to develop due to expanded wealth in rural areas in the industrial sector as agriculture transitions towards business focus.

The way forward

Income inequality is a core characteristic of modern society, a primary research subject in social stratification and labour economics, an important cause of political conflict in many nations and a major theme for philosophical study and prescriptive argument (e.g. Aristotle, 1985; Franklin et al., 1992; Sen, 1973). Recently, under the headings "social justice," "equity" or "legitimisation of inequality" the thriving tradition of empirical study into the roots and evolution of human norms on income distribution has emerged (Alwin, 1987; Gijsberts, 1999; Kelley & Evans, 1993; Kluegel & Smith, 1986; Zagorski, 1994). Achieving equitable economic growth is also essential to understand the causes of economic inequality. Diffenbaugh and Burke (2019) have found that anthropic climate forcing increases economic inequality among countries. According to Mills (2014) the large cities will experience additional warming due to the urban heat island effect, that is, the change of local climate patterns caused by urbanization. Several large cities are taking climate change into account in long-term strategies for which the inequality also been increased. According to Yeung (2002), exposure to social actors," who not only build up globalisation, but experience major changes in their social life, are the missing problem in the globalisation agenda. These actors will link the seemingly non-human mechanisms of economic globalisation with their manifestations in different kinds of human activities, behaviours and fighting to minimise economic inequality by means of globalisation.

Synonyms

Internationalisation, Mundialisation, Proliferation, Global Economy, Inequality

Cross-References
Inequality Within Nations; Measurement of inequality; Economic thoughts on inequality; Local and global environmental sustainability; Economic measures of inequality; Political inequality; Economic Policy to Reduce Inequality
References

Alwin, D. F. (1987). Distributive justice and satisfaction with material well-being. American Sociological Review, 52(1), 83–95.
Aristotle. (1985). Nicomachean ethics (trans. T. Irwin). Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing. Atkinson, A. B. (2015). Inequality: What can be done?. Harvard University Press.
Baum, S. (1997). Sydney, Australia: a global city? Testing the social polarisation thesis. Urban studies, 34(11), 1881-1902.
Baum, S. (1997). Sydney, Australia: a global city? Testing the social polarisation thesis. Urban studies, 34(11), 1881-1902.
BBC. (2020). Globalisation. Retrieved June 20, 2020, from https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zxpn2p3/revision/1
Blau, P. M., & Duncan, O. D. (1967). The American occupational structure. New York: Free Press
Bordo, M. D., Taylor, A. M., & Williamson, J. G. (Eds.). (2007). Globalization in historical perspective. University of Chicago Press.
Borland, J., Gregory, B., & Sheehan, P. (Eds.). (2001). Work rich, work poor: inequality and economic change in Australia. Melbourne: Centre for Strategic Economic Studies, Victoria University.
Chang, C. P., & Lee, C. C. (2010). Globalization and economic growth: A political economy analysis for OECD countries. Global Economic Review, 39(2), 151-173.
Che, Y., Lu, Y., Pierce, J. R., Schott, P. K., & Tao, Z. (2016). Does trade liberalization with China influence US elections? (No. w22178). National Bureau of Economic Research. Chiswick, B. R. (1971). Earnings inequality and economic development. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 85(1), 21-39.
CompareHero. (2018). Impact of income gap and disparity of wealth in Malaysia. Accessed on July 3, 2020, from https://www.comparehero.my/budgets-tax/articles/income- inequality-malaysia
Dauth, W., Findeisen, S., & Suedekum, J. (2014). The rise of the East and the Far East: German labor markets and trade integration. Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(6), 1643-1675.
David, H., Dorn, D., & Hanson, G. H. (2013). The China syndrome: Local labor market effects of import competition in the United States. American Economic Review, 103(6), 2121- 68.
DeLuca, S., Wood, H., & Rosenblatt, P. (2019). Why poor families move (and where they go): Reactive mobility and residential decisions. City & Community, 18(2), 556-593.
Diffenbaugh, N. S., & Burke, M. (2019). Global warming has increased global economic inequality. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(20), 9808-9813.

Dippel, C., Gold, R., & Heblich, S. (2015). Globalization and its (dis-) content: Trade shocks and voting behavior (No. w21812). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dollar, D. (2001). Globalization, inequality, and poverty since 1980. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Dorn, D., Hanson, G., & Majlesi, K. (2016). Importing political polarization? The electoral consequences of rising trade exposure (No. w22637). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Entrikin, J. N. (1991). The betweenness of place. In The Betweenness of Place (pp. 6-26).
Palgrave, London.
Fainstein, S. (1990). The changing world economy and urban restructuring. In J. &. Dennis, Leadership and urban regeneration (eds.) (pp. 31–47). Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Fainstein, S. S. (2001). Inequality in global city-regions. disP-the Planning Review, 37(144), 20-25. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/02513625.2001.10556764
Feigenbaum, J. J., & Hall, A. B. (2015). How legislators respond to localized economic shocks: Evidence from Chinese import competition. The Journal of Politics, 77(4), 1012-1030.
Franklin, M. N., Mackie, T. T., & Valen, H. (2009). Electoral change: Responses to evolving social and attitudinal structures in Western countries. ECPR Press.
Franklin, M., Mackie, T., & Valen, H. (Eds) (1992). Electoral change: Responses to evolving social and attitudinal structures in western countries. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fuinhas, J. A., Marques, A. C., & Lopes, C. (2019). The Impact of Financial Development and Globalisation on Economic Growth: Evidence from a Macro Panel of Ten Countries. Asian Economic and Financial Review, 9(3), 366.
Gagliani, G. (1987). Income inequality and economic development. Annual Review of Sociology, 13(1), 313-334.
Galbraith, J. K. (2011). Inequality and economic and political change: a comparative perspective. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 4(1), 13-27.
Galor, O. (2011). Inequality, human capital formation, and the process of development.
In Handbook of the Economics of Education (Vol. 4, pp. 441-493). Elsevier.
Galor, O., & Zeira, J. (1993). Income distribution and macroeconomics. The review of economic studies, 60(1), 35-52.
Gentilini, U., & Sumner, A. (2013). Setting an Income Poverty Goal After 2015. Working Paper Series. Boston: Harvard Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Center for Health and Human Rights.
Gijsberts, M. (1999). The legitimation of inequality in state-socialist and market societies, 1987–1996. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Utrecht, Thela Thesis.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2004). Intelligence: is it the epidemiologists' elusive "fundamental cause" of social class inequalities in health?. Journal of personality and social psychology, 86(1), 174.
Holton, R. J. (2014). Global inequalities. Macmillan International Higher Education.
Intriligator, M. D. (2004). Globalization of the world economy: Potential benefits and costs and a net assessment. Journal of Policy Modeling, 26(4), 485-498.
Jensen, J. B., Quinn, D. P., & Weymouth, S. (2016). Winners and losers in international trade: The effects on US presidential voting (No. w21899). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kaldor, M. (2013). Global civil society: An answer to war. John Wiley & Sons.
Kelley, J., & Evans, M. D. (1993). The legitimation of inequality: Occupational earnings in nine nations. American journal of sociology, 99(1), 75-125.

Kennedy, S. and Martinuzzi, E. (2014). Focus on Low earners at Davos is key to economic growth.	Accessed	on	July	3,	2020,	from https://www.independent.ie/business/world/focus-on-low-earners-at-davos-is-a-key-  to-economic-growth-29945546.html
Kluegel, J. R., & Smith, E. R. (1986). Beliefs about inequality: American’s views of what is and what ought to be. New York: Aldine de Gruyter
Kuepper, J. (2020, April). The Impact of Globalization on Economic Growth. The Balance. Retrieved on June 25, 2020 from https://www.thebalance.com/globalization-and-its- impact-on-economic-growth-1978843#citation-1
Kuznets, S. (1955). Economic growth and income inequality. The American economic review, 45(1), 1-28.
Lederman, D. (2015). How does income inequality affect economic growth? World Economic Forum.	Accessed	on	June	25,	2020	from https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2015/07/how-does-income-inequality-affect- economic-growth/
Leidner, D. E. (2010). Globalization, culture, and information: Towards global knowledge transparency. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 19(2), 69-77.
Lindert, P. H., & Williamson, J. G. (2003). Does globalization make the world more unequal?. In Globalization in historical perspective (pp. 227-276). University of Chicago Press.
Mayer, S. E. (1997). What money can't buy: Family income and children's life chances.
Harvard University Press.
Mazilu, M. (2010). Globalisation, where?. European Research Studies, XIII(1), 189-200 Milanovic, B. (2012). The Haves and the Have-Nots: A Brief and Idiosyncratic History of
Global Inequality. New York: Basic Books.
Mills, G. (2014). Urban climatology: History, status and prospects. Urban climate, 10, 479- 489.
O'Brien, K. L., & Leichenko, R. M. (2000). Double exposure: assessing the impacts of climate change within the context of economic globalization. Global environmental change, 10(3), 221-232.
Olimpia, N., & Stela, D. (2017). Impact of Globalisation on Economic Growth in Romania: An Empirical Analysis of Its Economic, Social and Political Dimensions. Studia Universitatis „Vasile Goldis” Arad–Economics Series, 27(1), 29-40.
Ostry, M. J. D., Berg, M. A., & Tsangarides, M. C. G. (2014). Redistribution, inequality, and growth. International Monetary Fund.
Oxfam. (2018). Reward work, not wealth. London, UK: Oxfam International. Available at: https://d1tn3vj7xz9fdh.cloudfront.net/s3fs-public/file_attachments/bp-reward-work- not-wealth-220118-en.pdf
Pew Research Centre (2014). Emerging and developing economies much more optimistic than rich countries about the future: Education, hard work considered keys to success, but inequality	still	a	challenge.	Accessed	on	July	3,	2020,	from https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2014/10/09/emerging-and-developing- economies-much-more-optimistic-than-rich-countries-about-the-future
Pierce, J. R., & Schott, P. K. (2016). The surprisingly swift decline of US manufacturing employment. American Economic Review, 106(7), 1632-62.
Pogge, T. (2002). World Poverty and Human Rights: Cosmopolitan Responsibilities and Reforms. Polity Press, Cambridge.
Pogge, T. (2007). Why inequality matters. In Held, D. and Kaya, A. (eds.). Global inequality.
Polity Press, Cambridge.
Polasek, W., & Sellner, R. (2011). Does globalization affect regional growth? Evidence for NUTS-2 regions in EU-27 (No. 266). Reihe Ökonomie/Economics Series.

Radhakrishnan, C. (2009). School Education and Globalisation - Problems and Prospects. A paper submitted & presented at Vidyodaya Institute of Education and Management, Cochin for Award for Excellence in Teaching - 2008 (Final Round). Accessed on June 25, 2020, from http://chettourhorizonsforteaching.blogspot.com/2009/01/school- education-and-globalisation.html
Rao, B. B., Tamazian, A., & Vadlamannati, K. C. (2011). Growth effects of a comprehensive measure of globalization with country-specific time series data. Applied Economics, 43(5), 551-568.
Rawls, J. (1971). A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Richard, K. (Ed.). (2003). Development Centre Seminars Globalisation, Poverty and Inequality. OECD Publishing.
Rodrik, D. (2017). Straight talk on trade: Ideas for a sane world economy. Princeton University Press.
Roser, M. (2013). Global Economic Inequality. OurWorldInData. Retrieved on June 25, 2020 from https://ourworldindata.org/global-economic-inequality
Sadekin, M. N. & Muhibbullah, M. (2020). Local and Global Environmental Sustainability. In
A. A. Leal Filho W., Affordable and Clean Energy. Encyclopedia of the UN Sustainable Development Goals (pp. 1-12). Switzerland: Springer Nature.
Sadekin, M. N., Ali, J., & Islam, R. (2018a). Livelihood vulnerability index: an application to assess the climatic vulnerability status of inland small-scale fishing livelihood. International Journal of Sustainable Development, 21(1-4), 75-101.
Sadekin, M. N., Ali, J., & Islam, R. (2018b). The livelihood strategies and food management of the small-scale fishing communities: a case study from inland open water area of Bangladesh. Journal of Economics and Sustainable Development, 9(22), 8-10.
Sadekin, M. N., Ali, J., & Islam, R. (2018c). The water management and social networking behavior of the small-scale fishing communities a case study from inland open water area of Bangladesh. International Journal of Economics, Commerce and Management, 6(10), 408-414.
Sadekin, M.N., Muzib, M., & Al Abbasi, A. A. (2015). Contemporary situation of FDI and its determinants: Bangladesh scenario. American Journal of Trade and Policy, 2(2), 121- 124.
Sassen, S. (1998). Globalization and its Discontents. New York: New Press.
Sassen, S. (1988). The mobility of labor and capital. New York: Cambridge University Press. Sassen, S. (1990). Economic restructuring and the American city. Annual Review of Sociology,
16(1), 465-490.
Sassen, S. (1991). The global city: New York, London, Tokyo. In D. Nugent, & J. Vincent, A Companion to the Anthropology of Politics (pp. 168-178). USA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Schjolden, A. (1999). Globalization, liberalization, and restructuring of the Brazilian telecommunications industry. Doctoral dissertation, The University of Arizona.
Sen, A. (1973). On economic inequality. Oxford: Clarendon.
Shittu, W. O., Yusuf, H. A., El Houssein, A. E. M., & Hassan, S. (2020). The impacts of foreign direct investment and globalisation on economic growth in West Africa: examining the role of political governance. Journal of Economic Studies, ahead to print. https://doi.org/10.1108/JES-09-2019-0446
Stilwell, F. (2019). Economic Inequality: Who Cares?. The Globe Post. Accessed on July 3, 2020, from https://theglobepost.com/2019/02/06/reducing-economic-inequality/
Sumner, A. (2017). The developer’s dilemma: The inequality dynamics of structural transformation and inclusive growth. ESRC GPID Research Network Working Paper, 1(29), 1-41.

Teubner, G. (2004). Defining a changing world: the discourse of globalization. Doctoral dissertation, Texas A&M University.
Vandenberg, P., & Creation, J. (2006). Poverty reduction through small enterprises. SEED Working paper, 75, 1-60.
Wade, R. (2003). The distrubing rise in poverty and inequality: is it all a 'Big Lie'? In D. Held, & M. Hoening-Archibugi, Taming globalization: frontiers of governance (pp. 18-47). New York: Cambridge, Polity Press.
Walby, S. (2009). Globalization and inequalities: Complexity and contested modernities. Sage Publications Ltd.
Waldinger, R. (1996). Still a promised city: African Americans and new immigrants in post- industrial New York. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
Weebly. (n.d.). What is Globalisation? Retrieved on June 12, 2020, from https://production- and-consumption-bs.weebly.com/globalisation.html
Yeung, H. W. C. (2002). The limits to globalization theory: a geographic perspective on global economic change. Economic geography, 78(3), 285-305.
Ying, Y. H., Chang, K., & Lee, C. H. (2014). The impact of globalization on economic growth. Romanian Journal of Economic Forecasting, 17(2), 25-34.
Zaborowski, W. (1994). Beliefs about inequality: Changing income hierarchy in Poland. In:
M. Alestalo, E. Allardt, A. Rychard & W. Wesolowski (Eds), The Transformations of Europe: Social Conditions and Consequence (pp. 207–218). Warsaw: IFiS Publishers.







Home > Research Topics > Economy & Work > Personal Finances



REPORT | JANUARY 9, 2025


Economic Inequality Seen as Major Challenge Around the World
Most say rich people’s political influence is a big contributing factor


BY RICHARD WIKE, MOIRA FAGAN, CHRISTINE HUANG, LAURA CLANCY AND JORDAN LIPPERT


Table of Contents


A new Pew Research Center survey of 36 nations finds widespread public concern about economic inequality. And when
asked what leads to this inequality, most people across the countries surveyed
point to the intersection of wealth and politics.

The key findings of the survey include:

& A median of 54% of adults across the nations surveyed say the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem in their country.
Another 30% say it is a moderately big problem.
& A median of 60% believe that rich people having too much political
influence contributes a great deal toward economic inequality.
& These views are especially common among people on the ideological left, though many on the right agree. Ideological divisions are particularly large in the United States.



The survey, conducted in spring 2024, also finds deep global anxieties about the
economic future and a strong desire for economic reform.

A median of 57% of adults across the nations polled expect children in
their country to be worse off
financially than their parents when they grow up.

What is a median?

Throughout this report, median scores are used to help readers see overall patterns in the data. The median percentage is the middle number in a list of all percentages sorted from highest to lowest.

This view is particularly widespread in several high-income nations, including Australia, Canada, France, Italy, Japan,
Spain, the United Kingdom and the U.S.

For the most part, this pessimistic view about the economic future is shared by
younger and older adults alike, as well as by people with higher and lower incomes.

However, in several countries, the public is more optimistic than pessimistic about the financial prospects of the next generation. These include a few South Asian and Southeast Asian nations: Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.

And there is modest optimism in some Latin American nations, too. About half of those surveyed in Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico think today’s children will be better off than their parents, while around four-in-ten or more say they will be worse off.

In many countries, there is more
economic pessimism today than before the COVID-19 pandemic – which hurt many people economically. In 15 of 31
countries where trends are available, the share of the public who thinks children will be worse off financially than their
parents is higher today than in pre- pandemic surveys.
Read more: The next generation’s financial future

Majorities in 33 of 36 nations also think their country’s economic system needs major changes or complete reform. People in middle-income nations in the Asia-Pacific region, Latin America, sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East-North Africa region are especially likely to want this degree of change.

Still, people in many wealthier countries want change, too. At least six-in-ten adults in
most of the European nations surveyed want major economic changes or complete reform; 66% share this view in the U.S.

In almost every country polled, people who see economic inequality as a very big problem are significantly more likely than others to want major changes or complete economic reform.

Read more: Changing the current economic system

Perceived causes of economic inequality

What causes economic inequality? In our list of six potential factors, the strong connection between money and politics resonates most with respondents, topping the list in 31 of 36 countries.

Overall, more than eight- in-ten adults say that rich people having too much influence over politics
contributes to economic inequality either a great deal (60% at the median) or a fair amount (26%).

But respondents see other factors as important, too.
Majorities across the
countries surveyed believe problems with the education system add to inequality in their nation.

Many also attribute inequality to some people working harder than
others or some being born with more opportunities.
Smaller but still notable shares cite other factors, including robots and
computers doing work previously done by humans, and discrimination against
racial or ethnic minorities.






Economic anxiety during a global election year

Voters in more than 60 countries went to the polls in 2024. In many of these countries – including France, Japan, South Africa, the UK and the U.S. – incumbents lost or suffered major electoral

setbacks. Economic concerns played a key role in these elections. For more, read our data essay: “Global Elections in 2024: What We Learned in a Year of Political Disruption.”


Read more: Factors seen as contributing to economic inequality

Views of other forms of inequality

Nearly a decade and a half after the Occupy Wall Street protests in the U.S. – which
coincided with similar movements in other countries – economic inequality remains the reality in many nations.

And as our survey highlights, this is a matter of strong public concern.
More than eight-in-ten
adults across the surveyed countries see the gap between rich and poor as a very or moderately big problem in their country.

But there’s concern about other forms of inequality as well. Roughly two-
thirds say discrimination against people based on
their race or ethnicity is a
very or moderately big
problem where they live, while about six-in-ten say this about gender inequality. And more than half describe discrimination against people based on their religion as a big problem.

Concerns about these issues are often tied to respondents’ demographic characteristics, background and experiences. For example, in some nations, people with lower incomes are especially worried about economic inequality; racial and ethnic minorities are more concerned about racial and ethnic discrimination; women are more concerned about
gender inequality; and people who prioritize religion are more likely to see religious discrimination as a very big problem.

Read more: Global perceptions of different ty pes of inequality

Ideological differences in views of economic inequality

On several questions in this survey, opinions vary significantly by political ideology.

For instance, while concerns about inequality are common across the ideological spectrum, in many countries people who place themselves on the left are especially likely to say the gap between rich and poor is a very big problem.

Those on the left are also particularly likely to see racial and ethnic discrimination and gender inequality as very big problems.

And the same pattern appears when it comes to the perceived causes of inequality. People on the left are more likely than those on the right to cite the political influence of the rich, racial discrimination, and the fact that some are born with more opportunities than others.

Some of the largest ideological divisions in the survey are in the U.S. For example, 76% of
U.S. liberals say economic inequality is a very big problem in their country, compared with just 30% of conservatives. This 46 percentage point gap is the largest left-right differences

across the countries surveyed. (The survey was conducted prior to
the November 2024 U.S. presidential election.)
Views of inequality in middle- and high- income nations
The survey finds
important differences between middle- and high-income nations in attitudes about income inequality.

(We surveyed 18 middle- income countries and 18 high-income countries.
Read Appendix A for a classification of these nations.)

While concerns about
economic inequality are widespread in all the
countries surveyed, people in middle- income nations are especially likely to describe it as a very big problem. They are also more likely to say that the rich having too much political influence is a major cause of inequality.

But when it comes to views about the economic future, people in middle- income nations are somewhat more positive. A median of 44% of adults in
middle-income nations believe that when children in their country grow up, they
will be financially better off than their parents. A median of just 26% in
wealthier nations express this view.








? PREV PAGE

1

NEXT PAGE ?


 Report PDF

 Topline


French: Les inégalités économiques considérées comme un enjeu majeur partout dans le monde
Italian: Le diseguaglianze economiche sono considerate una delle maggiori sfide a livello globale
Spanish: En todo el mundo, la desigualdad económica se considera un desafío importante
 American Trends Panel Wave 145

 Spring 2024 Survey Data


Sign up for our weekly newsletter
Fresh data delivered Saturday mornings


Submit




Topics Economic Inequality, Global Economy & Trade, Income, Wealth & Poverty, Personal Finances

SHARE THIS LINK:

Related

SHORT READS  MAY 7 , 2025

Growing share of U.S. adults say their personal finances will be worse a year from now

SHORT READS  DEC 9 , 2024

Roughly half of Americans are knowledgeable about personal finances

REPORT  MAR 27 , 2024

Methodology: 2023 focus groups of Asian Americans







Most Popular

VIDEO  MAR 27 , 2024

1 in 10: Redefining the Asian American Dream (Short Film)

REPORT  FEB 8 , 2024

Black Americans’ Views on Success in the U.S.



1 Confidence in Trump Dips, and Fewer Now Say They Support His Policies and Plans
2 How Americans View AI and Its Impact on People and Society
3 8 facts about divorce in the United States

4 If the U.S. had 100 people: Charting Americans’ religious beliefs and practices

5 Growing shares say the Trump administration is doing ‘too much’ to deport immigrants in the U.S. illegally


901 E St. NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20004 USA
(+1) 202-419-4300 | Main
(+1) 202-857-8562 | Fax
(+1) 202-419-4372 | Media Inquiries


RESEARCH TOPICS

Politics & Policy International Affairs Immigration & Migration Race & Ethnicity Religion
Age & Generations

Gender & LGBTQ



Family & Relationships Economy & Work Science
Internet & Technology News Habits & Media Methodological Research

FOLLOW US

 Email Newsletters  YouTube
 Instagram  Facebook  LinkedIn  X
 Bluesky
 Threads RSS Feed

ABOUT PEW RESEARCH CENTER Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan, nonadvocacy fact tank that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends shaping the world. It does not take policy positions. The Center conducts public opinion polling, demographic research, computational social science research and other data-driven research. Pew Research Center is a subsidiary of The Pew Charitable Trusts, its primary funder.


© 2026 Pew Research Center	About	Terms & Conditions	Privacy Policy	Cookie Policy	Feedback	Careers	Contact Us



Home  Economic Inequality


   How has income inequality within countries evolved over the past century?
While the steep rise of inequality in the United States is well-known, long-run data on the incomes of the richest shows countries have followed a variety of trajectories.



By Joe Hasell July 06, 2023
 Browse past versions

 Cite this article

 Reuse our work freely






Thanks to a growing body of research on the incomes of the richest, we now have a much better understanding of the long-run evolution of income inequality.
This area of research has developed methods for estimating income inequality based on income tax records, or summary tables released by tax authorities. This is often available over much longer time horizons than household surveys, the most common data source for inequality researchers. For many countries, tax data can provide us with a view of the evolution of inequality over the past 100 years or more. It can also provide a more accurate view of the incomes of the richest, which are often poorly captured in survey data, as discussed further in a note at the end of this article.
Following the first uses of this approach around 20 years ago, the coverage of countries and periods has grown extensively.  More recently, this effort has been coordinated by researchers at the World Inequality Database, who draw together the efforts of many inequality researchers according to a standardized methodology.
Below we show World Inequality Database estimates of the share of income received by the richest 1%. These data relate to income measured before taxes are paid and government benefits received. 

Estimates of inequality measured after tax can be found in this	.



Inequality over the past century: dramatic declines, followed by substantial rises in some countries   but not in others
Over the early and mid-20th century, dramatic declines in income inequality were a common experience. In many countries, the share of income received by the richest 1% fell by half or more: from around one-fifth or even one-quarter of all income on the eve of World War I, to one-tenth or less by the 1970s.
From the 1980s, inequality began to rise again in many high-income countries, tracing a  U-shaped  pattern over the past 100 years. The US is a clear example of this, as shown in the first chart. After a sustained rise over the last 40 years, before-tax inequality in the US is roughly at the same level today as it was a century ago. The US data is shown along with three other countries that saw substantial rises in inequality in recent decades: Canada, the United Kingdom, and Italy.
But this path has not been followed everywhere. Many countries that saw steep declines over the early and mid-20th century have maintained relatively stable levels of inequality since then. Examples of countries following this more  L-shaped  trend   Japan, Sweden, Spain, France, the Netherlands   are shown in the second chart.
The differences in these trends tell us something important: high and rising inequality is not an inevitability; it s something that individual countries can in?uence. A universal trend of increasing inequality would support the idea that inequality is completely determined by global economic forces like technological progress, globalization, or capitalism. The very different trends we see among countries exposed to these same forces suggest that national institutions, politics, and policy matter a lot.















Additional information: The problem of the  missing rich  in household survey data
The incomes of the richest are often poorly captured by household surveys. This problem   what inequality researcher Nora Lustig (2019) calls the  missing rich  problem   is due to a combination of factors. 
To understand these, it is worth bearing in mind that household surveys are not censuses: they gather information only from a population sample. This information is then used to make inferences about the population.

Show more








E N D N OT E S



1. Anthony Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez (2011) provide a good overview of initial research efforts in this field. Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez.  Top Incomes in the Long Run of History . Journal of Economic Literature 49, no. 1 (March 2011): 3 71. Available here.

2. The World Inequality Database describes these estimates as  Pre- tax, post-replacement  income.  Post-replacement  here means that the target concept of income is measured after the operation of the pension systems   both private and public. As such, this before-tax income concept already reflects transfers   social contributions and public pension benefits   that in some countries would normally be considered part of the redistribution achieved by governments. For further information, see the detailed documentation of the database s methodology.

3. Lustig, Nora.  The  Missing Rich  in Household Surveys: Causes and Correction Approaches . Commitment to Equity (CEQ) Working Paper Series. Tulane University, Department of Economics, November 2019. Available here.

4. Tax data may still underestimate the incomes of the extremely rich, to the extent that they are able to evade taxes. Evidence gathered by Alstads ter, Johannesen and Zucman (2019) suggests tax evasion can be substantial.

Alstads ter, Annette, Niels Johannesen, and Gabriel Zucman.  Tax Evasion and Inequality . American Economic Review 109, no. 6 (June 2019): 2073 2103. Available here.

5. Nora Lustig (2019) provides a good overview of the problems involved in capturing top incomes in household surveys accurately, and how researchers and statistical o?ces attempt to correct this.

Lustig, Nora.  The  Missing Rich  in Household Surveys: Causes and Correction Approaches . Commitment to Equity (CEQ) Working Paper Series. Tulane University, Department of Economics, November 2019. Available here.

6. See Carranza, Rafael, Marc Morgan, and Brian Nolan. (2021)  Top Income Adjustments and Inequality: An Investigation of the Eu- Silc  . Review of Income and Wealth.






Cite this work
Our articles and data visualizations rely on work from many different people and organizations. When citing this article, please also cite the underlying data sources. This article can be cited as:

BibTeX citation










Reuse this work freely
All visualizations, data, and code produced by Our World in Data are completely open access under the Creative Commons BY license. You have the permission to use, distribute, and reproduce these in any medium, provided the source and authors are credited.
The data produced by third parties and made available by Our World in Data is subject to the license terms from the original third-party authors.
We will always indicate the original source of the data in our documentation, so you should always check the license of any such third- party data before use and redistribution.
All of our charts can be embedded in any site.


Our World in Data is free and accessible for everyone.
Help us do this work by making a donation.

Donate now







lnstitute for Fiscal Studies

Country Studies: Inequalities in Europe and North America
A parallel study to the IFS Deaton Review

Bart Capéau André Decoster Bram De Rock
Jonas Vanderkelen
Toon Vanheukelom



Inequality in Belgium: 1985-2020




















Inequality in Belgium: 1985–2020*
Bart Capéau1,2, André Decoster2, Bram De Rock1,2, Jonas Vanderkelen2, Toon Vanheukelom2
1 ULB, ECARES
2 KU Leuven Department of Economics This version: September 12th 2024.
Contents

Inequality in Belgium: 1985–2020	1
1. Executive summary	3
Employment, wages, hours and individual earnings	3
Labour market institutions	3
Household incomes	4
2. Institutional background	5
2.1 The consultative economy	5
2.2 Social insurance	6
2.3 Income taxes	8
2.4 Education	8
3. Measurement issues and definitions	10
4. Individual employment and earnings	12
4.1 Trends in employment	12
4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)	18
4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)	24
4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self-employed)
27
4.5 Self-employment	32
5. Labour market institutions	34
5.1 Minimum wage and unions	34
5.2 The tax and benefit system	35
6. Household incomes	38
6.1 Trends in household composition	38
6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households	44
6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households	47
7. Immigrant outcomes	50
* This report is part of the Deaton Review Country Studies: A Trans-Atlantic Comparison of Inequalities in Incomes and Outcomes over Five Decades. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from National Science Foundation Grant 2214640 through the Trans-Atlantic Platform Recovery, Renewal and Resilience in a Post-Pandemic World and from BELSPO (Belgian Science Policy) under contract number B2/191/P3/BE-PARADIS (see www.beparadis.be). This paper uses data from the national EU--SILC (Statistics on Income and Living Conditions) survey for Belgium, made available by Statistics Belgium (Statbel). We are grateful to Patrick Lusyne from Statbel for help with data access and to Ella Marie Assal, Koen Decancq, Sarah Kuypers, Erik Schokkaert, Karel Van den Bosch, Stijn Van Houtven, and Gerre Verbist for help with data processing, useful comments and suggestions.
© Institute for Fiscal Studies	1
8. References	53
9. Data appendix	54
10. Appendix: 25–74 age group	55

1. Executive summary
Employment, wages, hours and individual earnings
The era of the end of the last century and the beginning of this century is mainly characterised by an increase in the employment rate, especially among older persons (60+) and women of prime working-age (25–60). This is partly due to the rising education level, especially among females. Since the early 2000s, there have been relatively more highly educated females than males in the prime working-age population. But the gradual equalisation of the legal pension age of females to that of males from 60 to 65 years, , between 1997 and 2009, and the restriction of early leavers’ schemes (see Section 2.2) for older unemployed people, have also contributed to the rise in employment rates. Employment among younger persons (16–24) is declining, however, most probably because they are spending longer at school. Neither the Great Recession nor the first year of the COVID crisis seem to have had a substantial impact on employment. This may be due to the massive use of temporary unemployment schemes, which allowed employees to keep their job after the lockdown, or allowed them to look for a job in another, less vulnerable sector.
Real hourly wages rose considerably during the 1980s and 1990s. While they declined somewhat during the first decade of the twenty-first century, they rose again in the period 2008-2015, be it less strongly than in the previous century. From 2015 to 2018 real wages stagnated. Until today, there remains to be a gender gap in real wages. There is no indication, however, that, overall, wages have become more unequal. If anything, wage inequality seems to have decreased between 2005 and 2017. The mean number of hours worked has remained quite stable during the last two decades, around 36–37 hours per week. This is somewhat lower than during the 1990s, when it was 38–39 hours a week.
Gross earnings rose substantially during the 1990s, but stagnated in the 2000s. The average impact of the Great Recession on gross earnings was small. During the first year of the COVID crisis earnings fell considerably, due to the lockdowns. There is, however, no indication that gross earnings inequality has risen significantly during the twenty-first century. On the contrary, there is a slight tendency of declining earnings inequality.
The number of self-employed persons is lower in the current century than at the end of previous century, but it has been slightly rising again during the last decade. The self-employed are predominantly found in the lower earnings deciles.

Labour market institutions
Collective wage bargaining is a structural component of the Belgian economic system. A collective agreement between employers and employees on maximal real wage growth is concluded biannually. There is a system of sectoral committees of employees and employees, represented by unions, where, among other things, sector- and profession-specific minimum wages are negotiated.
In Belgium, most social benefits are taxable. The ratio of gross benefit to gross income (earnings, other income plus benefits) of the lowest quartile of the equivalised household disposable income distribution has been between 40% and 50% during the first two decades of the twenty-first century. This is higher than it was at the end of the 1990s (between 20% and 35%). The ratio of taxes to gross household income of the bottom quartile of the equivalised disposable household income distribution has approached that of the second quartile during the last decade and is about 25%.

Household incomes
Real equivalised disposable income rose substantially throughout the whole period 1995–2020. The gap between education levels has, however, been increasing during the last two decades, as equivalised disposable household income of the lowly educated is stagnating, and even fell between 2008 and 2015, but seems to have recovered since then. Overall, the dip caused by the financial crisis was small and short. Inequality of equivalised disposable household incomes exhibits a slightly decreasing tendency during the first two decades of the twenty-first century. The incidence of poverty increased at the same time, in accordance with the widening of the education gap of equivalised disposable household income, which mainly affects the bottom 10%. This might explain the common opinion that income inequality has also risen in Belgium, which is at odds with the statistics, but may be due to a confusion between inequality and poverty.
There is redistribution from gross earnings towards households in which nobody is working. Nevertheless, the gap between equivalised disposable household income of persons living in households in which nobody works and those living in household with at least one person working is increasing over time.
Another persistent inequality is that between natives and migrants. Despite being quite well represented among the highly educated, the employment rate of migrants remains lower than that of natives. This is also reflected in lower earnings and equivalised disposable incomes. Despite the increase in the employment rate of migrants during recent years, their incomes relative to those of natives are still decreasing.
There is a positive correlation between earnings of partners, and this correlation seems to be increasing slightly over time. This, in combination an increasing education gap in earnings, might exert an upward pressure on inequality of household incomes in the longer term, though we have not found any empirical evidence so far in this sense.

2. Institutional background

Belgium is a federal state consisting of three regions (Brussels, Flanders, and Wallonia) and three communities (Dutch, French, and German speaking). Regions have autonomy over some elements of tax legislation, including part of the personal income tax. Furthermore, regions and communities are financed through a system of grants from the federal budget, linked to the domains over which the they have jurisdictional authority (their competences). The bulk of the social security system remains under federal authority. Since 2016, the communities have, however, gained authority over child allowances. They are also responsible for education and large parts of the healthcare system (e.g., elderly, mental, and home care). The regions are responsible, among other things, for public employment services and policies to encourage the unemployed to return to work.



2.1 The consultative economy
In the aftermath of World War II, a system of consultation between employer and employee representatives was established. Wages and labour legislation are negotiated between employers and employee representatives at the national, regional, sectoral and firm level. The National Labour Council (Conseil National du Travail), composed of 13 members of employer organisations, 13 trade-union members representing the employees, and a president, negotiates intersectoral collective labour agreements which are binding for the whole private sector. At the sectoral level there exist about 100 so- called joint committees (commissions paritaires), some of them divided into subcommittees, also with equal representation of employers and trade union. They can, within the bounds of the intersectoral agreements, conclude more specific labour and wage arrangements binding for the sector. Additional agreements can then be concluded at the firm level. An important element of these negotiations is the determination of (sectoral) minimum wages and (sectoral) real wage increases.
Since 1996, the social partners (representatives of employer organisations, trade unions and the organisation representing the self-employed) have to negotiate biannually on the maximum real wage increase (on top of the normal indexation with the CPI, see below). These negotiations are constrained by parameters set by the Central Economic Council (Conseil Central de l’Économie, mainly composed of representatives designated by the social partners) to safeguard the international competitiveness of the Belgian economy. The resulting agreement, if any, holds for all employees in the private sector, and also in the public sector since 2015. If there is no agreement, the federal government takes a decision.
Wages and social benefits are automatically indexed to inflation. To this end, a special price index, the so- called health index, is used (not including expenditures on alcohol, tobacco and petrol). Whenever prices have increased by 2% according to this index, wages and social benefits are revised. The timing of the wage revision may differ depending on the sector of the employees.
In the framework of the Generation Pact, concluded in 2005, it was decided that a budget must be fixed biannually to increase social benefits in order to tie them more closely to real wage growth. Once the budget is fixed, the exact allocation of that money is negotiated in the framework of the biannual negations on an inter-professional agreement that also contains the negotiated maximum real wage increase. Again, if there is no agreement, the federal government will take the decisions instead. The first envelope was fixed in 2007.

2.2 Social insurance
There are three coexisting systems of social security: one for employees, one for the self-employed and one for civil servants.
Currently the social security system covers the following domains: unemployment insurance, illness and disability insurance, public pensions, and three specific domains. These are insurance for accidents at work, occupational disease insurance, and annual holidays. Before 2016, child allowances were also part of the federal social security system. Since then, the competence for child allowances has been transferred to the communities. The rest of the social security system remains entirely federal. Contributions rates, eligibility rules and benefit levels apply across the whole country.
The social security system is partly financed by social security contributions paid by employees, employers, the self-employed and pensioners, and partly by the federal government. Some of the latter financing is structural. For example, part of VAT revenues is allocated to financing the social security system in the framework of a shift from direct to indirect taxation.
Employer contributions are typically flat-rate. This rate has been reduced gradually the last decades, and is currently around 25%. There are, however, many deductions for several categories of workers, with the aim of stimulating the creation of new jobs. Similarly, employee social security contributions are a flat- rate of 13.07%, but many reductions and exceptions exist. Since 2000, governments have introduced and modified a system of reductions for low wage earners, in order to incentivise labour market participation. To avoid such a system promoting part-time labour, the eligibility criteria for this so-called work bonus have since 2005 been made dependent not on actual earnings, but on full-time equivalent wages.

Unemployment insurance
Conditional on having worked a sufficient number of days before becoming unemployed, employees are eligible for unemployment benefits, subject to the requirement of actively looking for a new job. In order to obtain unemployment benefits, registration with a regional public unemployment service is mandatory. These public services actively guide the job search efforts of the unemployed.
Unemployment benefits depend on previous wages, with a cap and minimum level. The minima depend on the social status of the unemployed (single, cohabitant, cohabitant with dependent family). Unemployment benefits are decreasing over time and reach their minimum level after 4 years at the latest. During the first 3 months the replacement rate is 65% of the previous wage (subject to a cap). During the following 3 months the replacement rate is 60%, and for the last 6 months of the first year the replacement rate remains at 60% but the cap is tightened. From the second year onwards, the decay runs over five phases, and depends on the length of time spent working before becoming unemployed, age and social status. After at most 4 years, unemployed persons receive a fixed amount, no longer dependent on the previous wage, but still differentiated with respect to social status. In Belgium there is no time limit on unemployment benefits. However, the eligibility for unemployment benefits can (temporarily) be suspended if the public employment service or the social security authority of the unemployment benefits assesses the efforts of the unemployed to look for a job to be insufficient.
Another Belgian peculiarity is that, for trade union members, unemployment benefits are paid out by the union. Union representatives might intermediate when the unemployed person has conflicts with the authority concerning their eligibility and/or the amount.
There exists a system of unemployment benefits augmented with a company bonus for older employees of firms that shut down or fire these employees. Originally, the unemployed persons who benefited from this scheme were exempt from the requirement to be available on the labour market, and the system was considered to be a conventional early leavers’ scheme. The age and career conditions to be admitted to the system, which differ according to sector and profession, have been gradually restricted during the last two decades. Since 2015, new entrants in the system should remain available on the labour market and



they receive special coaching to search for a new job. Until 2015, there also existed a scheme of augmented unemployment benefits for older persons who had worked for a sufficiently long time. This system was abandoned in 2015. Under certain conditions the unemployment benefits of persons aged over 55 years or who have worked for a sufficiently long time will not decrease after the first year.
In principle, self-employed and civil servants (who have job security) are not eligible to receive unemployment benefits. Youngsters leaving school are entitled to a payment if they don’t find work within a year, known as an insertion premium, also conditional on actively looking for a job. Since 2015, this premium has been time-limited (3 years) and only persons aged under 25 years and who have finished secondary education are eligible.

Pensions
The pension system consists of three pillars: the public pension, additional company pension schemes and private pension saving schemes. The latter two are usually paid out as capital because of the favourable tax treatment compared to payment as an annuity.
Only the first pillar belongs to the social security system. This first pillar consists of three systems: one for employees, one for the self-employed and one for civil servants. The rules for determining the pension are different for each of the three systems. All three pension schemes are defined-benefit pay-as-you-go systems. The amount of benefit depends on previous wages and, for employees and the self-employed, on social status (single or being married with a partner who does not work or has a low income or pension). For employees and the self-employed, 45 years of work are required in order to receive a full pension entitlement, and the replacement rate is 60% for singles and 75% for persons being married with a partner who does not work or has a low income or pension. Before 2021, there was an additional correction coefficient of 69% in the system for the self-employed because they paid less social contributions. For employees and the self-employed there is no mandatory retirement age. Employers have the right, however, to end the contract of their employees at the legal retirement age, which is currently 65 years. It was 60 years for females until 1996, after which it was gradually increased to 65 years in 2009. The legal retirement age will be increased to 66 years in 2025, and to 67 years in 2030. Early retirement is possible from the age of 60, dependent on having worked a sufficiently long time. The earliest possible retirement age will rise to 61 in 2025, and to 62 in 2030.

Health insurance
Subscription to a basic health insurance scheme is compulsory, but free of charge. It covers part of expenditures on general practitioners and specialists, eye and dental care, hospitalisation, physiotherapy, and drugs. The coverage rate is higher for some categories of people with special medical needs or low income.
Additional insurance can be bought for non-covered costs and out-of-pocket expenditures. Some employers provide free hospitalisation insurance for (part of) their workers as part of in-kind benefits.
There is a cap on yearly out-of-pocket expenditures on healthcare covered by the mandatory health insurance, the amount of which depends on income. All medical expenses covered by the mandatory insurance that exceed this cap are reimbursed.
A special feature of the organisation of the reimbursement of the mandatory health insurance is that it is managed by private non-profit organisations (mutualities). The government strives for cost efficiency by making the subsidisation of these organisations dependent on the risk profile of their clients and letting these organisations compete on additional coverage and services.
Primary healthcare is private and there are both public and private hospitals. Communities organise and/or regulate the system of healthcare provision for elderly, disabled persons and persons with mental diseases. Since this is a competence of the communities, interventions, additional compulsory insurance and premiums vary across the country.

Child allowances
Since 2016, childe allowances no longer belong to the social security system and are a competence of the communities. Therefore, the child allowance regulations are not identical across the country. However, the current systems all share the same principles. The child is the rightholder of the basic allowance and the amount of that benefit is therefore independent of the income of any household member or parent. The amount differs across communities. There are social bonuses in case of low household income, though the specific conditions are again community-specific.

Social assistance
Social assistance is not part of the social security system. In principle, people who have insufficient means of existence are eligible for social assistance. Such assistance is subject to the condition of willingness to work. Some exceptions to this condition exist (persons not able to work due to certain circumstances). Special regulations are in place for those elderly who are not eligible for the public pension scheme. People who have no legal permission to stay in the country are not eligible. Social assistance is not automatically granted. There is a considerable amount of non-take-up.

2.3 Income taxes
Every person receiving monetary income (earnings, benefits, capital income, allowances, etc.) is supposed to file an income tax form. Social assistance, child allowances and education scholarships are not taxable. Earnings, profits and social benefits are taxed jointly. Most incomes are subject to a withholding tax when they are paid out. The final settlement, which usually occurs in the year after the incomes have been received, takes such withheld moneys into account.
Married couples and persons officially cohabiting have to file jointly, but most of the tax rules are applied on an individual basis. The tax code allows certain joint incomes to be allocated to one or to both of the partners, and if one of the partners has low or no taxable income, part of the taxable income of the partner with the higher income can be transmitted to the other partner.
Most capital income, including real estate income, is taxed separately through a withholding tax. In most of these cases, the taxpayer then does no longer need to declare this income in the tax return. As a consequence, administrative tax files are not representative of capital income, even in the absence of any problem of tax compliance and one can consider the personal income tax as a tax on earnings and replacement incomes.
On top of two major reforms of the personal income tax system in 1988 and 2001–04, which both substantially reduced the average personal income tax rate, several additional measures have been taken to increase the income after tax for employees with low wages or for persons actively participating in the labour market.

2.4 Education
Except for some general overarching regulations, education policy is a competence of the communities. The school system consists of three cycles: primary school (age 5–11, ISCED 1), secondary schooling (12– 18, ISCED 2–3), and higher education (ISCED 4–8). Within the secondary cycle there are options for general, technical, art and vocational training. Since 1983, education is compulsory until 18 years (previously it was 15 years); part-time education is possible from the age of 15. Grade retention and early school dropout are considerable (De Groote and Declercq, 2021).
There are both private and public education institutions, but they are all subject to the same standards (fixed at the community level), and the certificates they are entitled to award are equivalent.



In principle, the choice of school is free. In primary and secondary education, there are no registration fees. There is a system of study scholarship for parents with low income in order to cover (part of) other school expenses for their kids. The scholarship system is governed by the communities. Participation in higher education is subject to a fee, the amount of which is fixed by the community authorities and may depend on the level of education (bachelor’s degree, master’s degree, etc.). Reduced tariffs are available for students whose parents have low income or who receive a scholarship. Scholarships are usually insufficient to cover all study costs.

3. Measurement issues and definitions
Data:
? We use three sets of surveys on income and living conditions: the Socio-Economic Panel (SEP, 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997), European Community Household Panel (ECHP, 1994–2001) and EU Statistics on Income and Living Conditions (EU-SILC, 2004–21). Details are provided in the data appendix.

Unit of analysis:
? Unless otherwise specified, the unit of analysis is the individual.

? For most of the analysis we restrict to persons aged 25–60. We replicate a small set of figures for the 25–74 age group in the appendix. All calculations use sample weights to attain estimates of the corresponding population level statistics.

? Nominal amounts are converted into 2019 real terms using the CPI.

Definitions:
? Employment rate: the fraction of the population that is employed according to self-declared employment status (rather than having non-zero earnings).

? Gross earnings: gross annual real individual earnings (includes self-employed).

o If an employee has multiple jobs, earnings from all jobs are summed together.

o Employee earnings include all cash benefits such as paid overtime, regular holiday payments, irregular payments (end-of-year premium, additional holiday payments), but not in-kind benefits (including company cars).

o Earnings include taxes and employee social security benefits, but not employer social security contributions, employer contributions to collective pension funds (second pension pillar), or other employer contributions (e.g., collective hospital insurance).

o The self-employed are asked for their yearly profits (defined as revenues from their business or activities minus costs).

? Hours of work: usual/ typical paid hours worked per week, including paid overtime. Excludes self- employed workers. Concerns the week preceding the interview.

? Wages:

o Wages are not a basic variable in our data. They are only calculated for employees, not for self-employed. In Belgium white-collar workers are paid monthly (and thus have a variable hourly wage rate) while blue-collar workers have a fixed hourly wage (and variable monthly income).

o For the SEP (1985–97) and ECHP (1998–2001) hourly wages are calculated by dividing adjusted gross labour income in the month preceding the survey by the reported number of hours worked during the week preceding the survey multiplied with 4.33 (the number of weeks in a month). Adjusted gross labour income includes employee social security contributions but not those of the employer. This income is then adjusted by a factor of



13.85/12 in order to include the additional holiday payments and end-of-year premium in the hourly wage remuneration.

o For the EU-SILC (2003–20) we do not have income information corresponding to the moment to which the information on hours applies (the week preceding the interview). We use yearly gross labour income of the previous year, including additional holiday payments and end-of- year premium when applicable. To obtain an hourly wage, we divide this yearly income by the reported number of months worked the previous year multiplied by 4.33 (the number of weeks in a month) times the reported hours worked in the week preceding the interview.

? Disposable household income (household equivalised income after deducting taxes and adding benefits and tax credits)

o Disposable income includes: usual earnings from employment, profit or loss from self- employment, state support (social benefits, including state pensions, and social assistance), income from occupational and private pensions, investment income, maintenance payments received, and income from scholarships. It includes for the SILC years a value for income from company cars, but not other fringe benefits.

o Disposable income does not include imputed rents for home-owners. For all years, except the last one (income 2020, SILC survey year 2021), the withholding tax on imputed rents from real estate property is not deducted.

o Disposable income is net of: income tax payment, social security contributions and local taxes.

o Incomes are equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale, normalised to a single individual: 1 for the reference person of the household plus 0.5 for each additional household member aged 14 and over, plus 0.3 for each household member under 14 years of age.

Splits:
? Sex: female, male

? Education: We distinguish three levels based on the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) classification: ISCED 0–2 (lower than secondary school), ISCED 3–4 (at least secondary school completed, including persons who completed a post-secondary non-tertiary education, but no tertiary education) and ISCED 5–8 (tertiary education completed, including short-cycle tertiary education).

? Position in household: Single without dependent children; single with children; couples without dependent children; couples with children; adult child; other. A child is a household member aged 0– 18 or a household member who is either a child of the reference person, or for whom a parent is member of the household (for the SILC survey only). For ECHP only persons under 18 years of age can be identified as child.

Growth incidence curves (GICs): These are defined as the growth in quantile values as in Ravallion and Chen (2003), not as the growth in mean income of quantile groups (as in Lakner and Milanovic, 2012).

4. Individual employment and earnings
This section looks at trends in individual employment and earnings. With respect to earnings, we first look separately at hourly wages and hours worked, before bringing them together in a set of charts on earnings inequality. Due to a lack of reliable data on hours worked for the self-employed, we restrict the analysis of wages and hours to employees, but include both employees and the self-employed in the analyses of total earnings.

4.1 Trends in employment
Figure 1 shows employment rates for young people (16–24), prime working-age persons (25–60) and older people (61–74). The employment rate of young people started to decline from 2004 onwards, both for men and women. The picture is less clear for the subperiods 1985–97 and 1998–2001. The volatility of the figures during the entire period (1985–2001) indicates that our data may be less reliable for that period. The declining participation rates of young people are most probably due to increases in levels of education. It is strange, then, that we only see the decline starting in 2004 in our figures.
The employment rate of prime working-age men has been relatively stable over the last four decades, while that of women almost doubled (plus 72%). The gender gap has thus narrowed from 40 percentage points to about 6 percentage points.
While the employment rate of older men declined over the years 1985–2001, that of women fluctuated between 2.3% and 3.8% during that period. From the early 2000s onwards, the employment rate of both older men and women increased spectacularly: that of men more than doubled, and that of women even quintupled. This most probably has to do with continuous efforts to encourage older people to continue to work until the regular pension age. To that end conventional early leavers’ schemes (see Section 2.2) were gradually discontinued (a few exceptions notwithstanding). Moreover, the pension age for women was gradually increased from 60 to 65 years over the period 1997–2009.
Figure 1. Employment rates by age and sex, over time
Male 16–24	Male 25–60	Male 61–74	All
Female 16–24	Female 25–60	Female 61–74
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


                                          Year Note: Individuals aged 16–74. Employment based on self-reported status. Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



The increased employment of women of prime age over the whole period 1985–2019 and of older women from 2004 to 2019 is confirmed by Figure 2. The employment rate of women in more recent years (2012 and 2019) dominates that of older years (1985, 1996, and 2004), for almost all ages. Between 1985 and 1996, employment rates for women aged 30 to 55 years increased by almost 20 percentage points. Female employment rates remained stable between 1996 and 2004, but saw another important increase for women aged 45-60 in the period 2004-2019. For males, such cohort effects are absent.
Figure 2. Employment rates over life cycle by sex, selected years
Female	Male

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0















16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56 61 66 71
Age

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0



16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56 61 66 71
Age



Note: Sample is individuals aged 16–74. Employment based on self-reported status.
Source: SEP 1985; ECHP 1996; EU-SILC 2004, 2012, and 2019.

In Belgium the school system consists of three cycles: primary school (ages 6–12), secondary school (12– 18) and higher education. Higher education normally starts at 18, but there are many repeaters during primary and secondary school (De Groote and Declercq, 2021). In contrast to many other countries, we include persons having completed vocational training in the highly educated group. Since 1983, full-time education is compulsory until 15, and part-time education until 18, but there are many dropouts.
Figure 3 shows the percentage of low (less than secondary school finished, ISCED 0–2), middle (at least secondary school finished, but no tertiary education, ISCED 3–4) and highly educated (any form of completed tertiary education including short-cycle vocational training, ISCED 5–8) among people aged 25–60. The percentage of low educated declined steadily from about 53% in 1985 to 15% in 2021. This is compensated by an increased percentage of middle and highly educated people in the period 1985–97. From then on, the percentage of middle-educated people is more or less constant (34–36%) while the number of highly educated people continues to rise. The wiggles in the early 2000s are most probably due to data issues rather than reflecting real volatility. It is noteworthy that the number of highly educated persons overtakes that of middle-educated and low-educated from the end of the 1990s onwards, and the same holds true for the number of middle-educated compared to the number of low-educated people. All in all, the general level of education in Belgium has increased enormously in the last four decades, even though there are some concerns about the quality of education during that same period.

Figure 3. Educational attainment over time (%)

ISCED 0–2	ISCED 3–4	ISCED 5–8
60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.

Figure 4 breaks down the numbers of Figure 3 by sex. While during the period 1985–95 women are less educated than men, this imbalance was reversed during the second half of the 1990s. For women, the rise of higher education during that period is at the expense of a smaller number of persons who do not obtain a secondary school certificate (low-educated). For men, there seems to be rather a shift from the group of middle-educated towards higher-educated people. From the 2000s onwards the number of highly educated women surpasses that of men and gap between the share of highly educated women and men gradually increased. The share of middle educated 25-60-year old men is increasing during the 2000s to more than 40%, while that of females fluctuates between 32 and 35%. The share of lowly educated persons is roughly equal for both sexes and declines over the same period.



Figure 4. Educational attainment by sex, over time (%)
Male: ISCED 0–2	Male: ISCED 3–4	Male: ISCED 5–8
Female: ISCED 0–2	Female: ISCED 3–4	Female: ISCED 5–8
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10

Year
Note: Individuals aged 25–60.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.

Figure 5 breaks down the employment rate of individuals aged 25-60 by education level and Figure 6 adds the sex dimension to the picture. Not surprisingly, the higher the level of education, the higher the level of employment. At the end of the past century, employment rates of different education levels move in parallel, while in the 2000s the increase in employment is mainly due to an increase in employment of the highly educated. The decline for all education levels in 2021 did not result in an overall decline in employment because of the shift in composition of the population from poorly to highly educated people.
Figure 5. Employment rates by education, over time (%)

ISCED 0–2	ISCED 3–4	ISCED 5–8	All
100

90

80

70

60

50

40


                                                      Year Note: Individuals aged 25–60. Employment based on self-reported status. Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.

Figure 6 shows that in the first two decades of the twenty-first century, the gender gap in employment rates has nearly been closed for highly educated persons. For low- and middle-educated persons the gap is slowly narrowing, but remains high. For low-educated persons the narrowing of the gender gap seems in recent years more a consequence of the lower employment rate of men than that it is due to a more rapid increase of the employment rate for women than for men. The growing group of females with high education (Figure 4) and their growing employment rate (Figure 6), may explain why prime working-age women’s employment rate increased, both in absolute terms and relative to that of men (yellow lines of Figure 1).
Figure 6. Employment rates by sex and education, over time (%)
Male: ISCED 0–2	Male: ISCED 3–4	Male: ISCED 5–8
Female: ISCED 0–2	Female: ISCED 3–4	Female: ISCED 5–8
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20

Year
Note:	Individuals	aged	25–60.	Employment	based	on	self-reported	status.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figure 7 shows that unemployment decreases over time (1993–2020) from over 9% to about 5%, some upheavals in 2003–05, 2009–10 (aftermath of financial crisis, which in Belgium had only a small and short impact on unemployment) and 2013–15 notwithstanding. The latter might be due to the gradual abolition of the exemption of older unemployed persons from looking for work in order to be eligible for unemployment benefits. Before that abolition, these persons were not classified as unemployed. Furthermore, the share of long-term unemployed in overall unemployment tends to decline from roughly 60% in the early 2000s to less than 50% in the most recent years.



Figure 7. Unemployment rate by duration of unemployment, over time
 Total   Short term   Long term
10.0
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0


Note: Individuals aged 20–64. The unemployment rate is calculated as a fraction of the labour force, that is, persons working and those looking for work. Short-term unemployment is less than 1 year and long-term duration of unemployment is 1 year or more. Source: Eurostat variables UNE_RT_A_H and UNE_LTU_A_H.

4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)
Between 1985 and 2001, wages of employees show an increasing trend for both males and females. From 2003 onwards, they start to decrease until 2008 and then increase again. Given the rise in the education of employed people, the decline of real wages between 2003 and 2008, might mean that remuneration of jobs with the same qualifications has actually gone down. This is, however, not confirmed by Figure 9 which breaks down Figure 8 by education.
During the last twenty years, the difference between the median wage of males and females varied between 1 and 1.5 Euro, without showing a clear trend. In relative terms (the difference in median wages over the male median wage) is somewhat more volatile and ranges between 6 and 8% during that same period, but still does not exhibit a trend. This is somewhat surprising as similar figures produced by the OECD and Statbel (the Belgian statistical office) show a declining gender wage gap. These statistics are based on the relative measure (difference in median wages over male median wage) but for the whole full time working population in the private sector, without age limits. Similar observations hold for the evolution of the gender wage gap by education during the last two decades: it shows no clear trend. The gender wage gap tends to be somewhat lower for middle-educated individuals during that same period.


Figure 8. Median real hourly wage among employees, overall and by sex, over time

Male	Female	All
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14

Year
Note: Employees aged 25–60. Employment based on self-reported status and conditional on reporting positive income from labour and positive number of hours worked. Wages are in 2019 prices.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figure 9. Median real hourly wage among employees, by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0–2	Male: ISCED 3–4	Male: ISCED 5–8
Female: ISCED 0–2	Female: ISCED 3–4	Female: ISCED 5–8
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10

Year
Note: Employees aged 25–60. Employment based on self-reported status and conditional on reporting positive income from labour and positive number of hours worked. Wages are in 2019 prices.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figure 10 shows how wages evolve over the life cycle. We truncate the data at age 55 because of a lack of sufficient observations for older ages. Figures are broken down by sex and controlled for education level. Hourly wages were hardly increasing over the life cycle in earlier years (1988–92) for the low- educated, and the gender gap was relatively constant over the life cycle. The wage path of the middle- and highly educated is increasing for both males and females. In more recent years (2018–20) this also the case for the low-educated. Especially for highly educated people, the gender gap is increasing over the life cycle in early years. This continues to be the case in more recent years, though not quite to the same extent. This might indicate that the gender gap is partly explained by more interrupted working lives of females, which results in fewer seniority rights.

selected periods
ISCED 0–2	ISCED 3–4	ISCED 5–8
1988–92


Male	Female
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
25 30  35  40 45  50  55

Male	Female
35

Male	Female
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
25  30  35  40  45  50  55
2003–05
Male	Female
35

Male	Female
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
25  30  35  40  45  50  55

Male	Female
35

30	30	30
25	25	25
20	20	20
15	15	15
10	10	10


5
25 30  35  40 45  50  55

Male	Female
35

5
25  30  35  40  45  50  55
2018–20
Male	Female
35

5
25  30  35  40  45  50  55

Male	Female
35

30	30	30
25	25	25
20	20	20
15	15	15
10	10	10


5
25 30  35  40 45  50  55

5
25  30  35  40  45  50  55

5
25  30  35  40  45  50  55

Note: Employees aged 25–60. Employment based on self-reported status and conditional on reporting positive income from labour and positive number of hours worked. Wages are in 2019 prices.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1999–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figures 11–13 provide information on wage inequality. Figure 11 shows the Gini index, Figure 12 shows the rougher, but nowadays popular 90:10 and 50:10 ratios, and Figure 13 shows growth incidence curves (GICs).
During the period 2003–17, the trend of the overall and gender-specific Gini indicates a decline in wage inequality over time. The large jump upwards during the last 3 years might be due to the switch to administrative data for gross earnings, which might result in greater inconsistencies between hours information (self-reported situation at moment of survey) and earnings (administrative data of the past year). During the period 1985–97, the Ginis exhibit an inverted U-shape, in line with the quantile ratios shown in Figure 12.
According to our data, there is no evidence of a persisting tendency of rising hourly wage inequality in Belgium, both in the longer term and during the last two decades.


Figure 11. Gini coefficient of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time

All	Male	Female
0.26


0.24


0.22


0.20


0.18

Year
Note: Employees aged 25–60. Employment based on self-reported status and conditional on reporting positive income from labour and positive number of hours worked. Wages are in 2019 prices. The top and bottom 1% of the sex-specific distributions have been excluded.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.

All: 90:10 ratio	Male: 90:10 ratio	Female: 90:10 ratio
All: 50:10 ratio	Male: 50:10 ratio	Female: 50:10 ratio
3.50
3.25
3.00
2.75
2.50
2.25
2.00
1.75
1.50
1.25

Year
Note: Employees aged 25–60. Employment based on self-reported status and conditional on reporting positive income from labour and positive number of hours worked. Wages are in 2019 prices
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.

The inverted U-shape of the GICs (Figure 13) for 1985–97 is in accordance with the 90:10 ratios being slightly higher and the 50:10 considerably higher in 1997 than in 1985. From 1997 to 2001 the GIC has a downward trend for males and an increasing one for females and overall, again in accordance with the evolution of the quantile ratios of those years. Comparing 2003 with 2010, the resulting GICs are downward sloping, in accordance with the fall of both the Gini and the quantile ratios between those years. Real wage growth is even negative for the higher deciles during that period. Though less outspoken, also the GICs for the period 2010-2017 exhibit a decreasing trend.
The picture changes substantially for the period 2018-2020. The overall GICs and those of females for that period are roughly increasing. This, again, corresponds with the rise in the inequality indicators. For males, the GIC is decreasing from the third to eighth decile. This might be in line with the observation that the Gini of male wages is slightly lower in 2020 than in 2018 despite the higher 90:10 and 50:10 quantile ratios. It also illustrates that summary measures such as quantile ratios might be in conflict with more traditional summary inequality measures such as the Gini, and it might be explaining the divergence in opinion on the course of inequality over time, even when there is agreement about the underlying distributions.



Figure 13. Annualised growth in hourly wages among employees aged 25–60 by wage decile, overall and by sex, selected periods




2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0

All	Male	Female
1985–97	1997–2001
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0


2003–10	2010–17
2.5	1.0


2.0
1.5
1.0



0.5



0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0


0.0



-0.5


2018–20

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0


Note: Employees aged 25–60. Employment based on self-reported status and conditional on reporting positive income from labour and positive number of hours worked. Wages are in 2019 prices.
Source: SEP 1985, 1997; ECHP 1997, 2001; EU-SILC 2004, 2011, 2018, 2019, and 2021.

4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)
While employment among prime working-age people has been on the rise over the last decades, the number of hours worked has remained rather stable and hovers around 36–37 hours (Figure 14). The observations for the ECHP survey (1998–2001) are somewhat higher, but we have no explanation for this. During that period (1998–2001) the number of hours worked seems to decline somewhat. Also, the number of hours worked according to the first SILC survey (2004) is exceptionally high. Men work more hours than women. Only during the last few years does the gender gap in hours seem to narrow a little.


Figure 14. Mean weekly hours worked among employees, overall and by sex, over time
Male	Female	All
45


40


35


30


25

Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. Employment based on self-reported status, conditional on positive number of hours work reported.
Source: SEP 1985–97; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



When we condition further on education level (Figure 15), we see that in the period 1985–97 the number of weekly hours worked by low- and middle-educated females is declining, while it is increasing for highly educated ones. For males, the number of hours worked is rising for all education levels during that period (1985–97), albeit more so for the highly educated.


Figure 15. Mean hours worked among employees, by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0–2	Male: ISCED 3–4	Male: ISCED 5–8
Female: ISCED 0–2	Female: ISCED 3–4	Female: ISCED 5–8
50

45

40

35

30

25

Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. Employment based on self-reported status, conditional on positive number of hours work reported.
Source: SEP 1985–97; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figure 16 shows the distribution of the evolution of hours worked over the gender-specific wage deciles, for different time periods. From 1985 to 1997, average hours worked by females are declining for the lower deciles, while they are increasing for the higher deciles. This corresponds to the finding of Figure 15, where it was shown that average hours worked by highly educated females were higher in 1997 than in 1985, while they are (slightly) lower for low- (middle-)educated women. The decline in the weekly number of hours worked between 2004 and 2010 is to be attributed almost exclusively to the lower wage deciles.

sex, selected years

1985–97	1997–2001


1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

Male	Female	All

Male	Female	All
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3

2004–10	2010–17


1	Male	Female	All 0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-8

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

Male	Female	All



2018–20
3	Male	Female	All
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3


Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. Employment based on self-reported status, conditional on positive hours work reported and positive wages. The annualised growth is calculated using the average hours worked per wage decile.
Source: SEP 1985, 1997; ECHP 1997, 2001; EU-SILC 2004, 2010, 2017, 2018, and 2020.


4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self- employed)
In this subsection we look at earnings, combining the information of the previous two subsections (hours and wages). However, we now add the self-employed into the picture. Gross earnings do not include non- monetary fringe benefits, such as company cars. They are expressed in yearly amounts at 2019 prices. The data from to the ECHP should be taken with caution, as the reconstruction of gross incomes from net incomes relies on a rough tax-benefit calculator.
Male median earnings were increasing in the period 1988–97 and 1998–2000 (Figure 17). The picture for females during these periods is less monotonic. Both male and female median earnings in 1985 were higher than in 1988. During the period 2005–17 earnings were relatively constant for both males and females. The still substantial gender gap in earnings is hardly narrowing during that same period. The dip in 2010–11 is remarkably small for a period called the ‘Great Recession’.


Figure 17. Median real gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time

Male	Female	All
45

40

35

30

25

20

Year
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–60 with positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices. The 2017 and 2018 observations are not connected as most of the employee incomes of 2018 and subsequent years were gathered using tax register data, rather than through survey questions as before. Self-employment income remains self-reported though. For the SEP and ECHP, gross incomes are reconstructed from net incomes using microsimulation techniques.
Source: SEP 1985–97; ECHP 1999–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figure 18 conditions the previous figures on education level. Over time, the median earnings of highly educated women overtake those of low- and middle-educated men. The slight narrowing of the gender gap in earnings between 2003 and 2017 is observed for all education levels.
The transition to administrative data in 2018 seems to suggest that the earnings education gap between the highly educated on the one hand, and middle- and low-educated on the other hand, was higher than what we learn from survey data.

Male: ISCED 0–2	Male: ISCED 3–4	Male: ISCED 5–8
Female: ISCED 0–2	Female: ISCED 3–4	Female: ISCED 5–8
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15


Year
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–60 with positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices. The 2017 and 2018 observations are not connected as most of the employee incomes of 2018 and subsequent years were gathered using tax register data, rather than through survey questions. Self-employment income remains self-reported though. For the SEP and ECHP, gross incomes are reconstructed from net incomes using microsimulation techniques.
Source: SEP 1985–97; ECHP 1999–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figures 19–21 provide statistics on inequality in gross earnings: Gini coefficients, quantile ratios and GICs are shown.2
Both the Gini coefficients (Figure 19) and the quantile ratios (Figure 20) suggest that there is a big jump upwards in earnings inequality when using administrative data (EU-SILC data from 2018 onwards). Further investigation tells us that this is due to a concentration of small incomes in the administrative data which seem not to be reported in surveys. However, this upwards jump vanishes when the same statistics would be calculated including the zero earners.
Earnings inequality was on the rise between 1988 and 1997, while there is a slight decreasing tendency between 2003 and 2017. Throughout inequality among female earnings is much higher than that among males. This is most probably due to the more frequent occurrence of part-time jobs among females.








2 Other countries have also produced charts on the Gini coefficient over time of total employer cost, that is, gross earnings including employer social security contributions, and on annualised growth in employer cost. That is not possible for Belgium as we do not have reliable data on employer cost. Employer social security contributions are imputed by the statistical agencies collecting and processing the data and the imputation quality is poor, and does not allow for diversification in effective contribution rates. For the same reason it has not been possible to include a chart on disposable income as a proportion of gross household income plus employer social security contributions, by net household income quartile, in Section 5.2.



Figure 19. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings of workers aged 25–60, overall and by sex, over time

All	Male	Female
0.46

0.42

0.38

0.34

0.30

0.26

0.22

Year
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–60 with positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices. The 2017 and 2018 observations are not connected as most of the employee’s incomes of 2018 and subsequent years were gathered using tax register data, rather than through survey questions. Self-employment income remains self-reported though. For the SEP and ECHP, gross incomes are reconstructed from net incomes using microsimulation techniques.
Source: SEP 1985–97; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.

The upward jump in the 90:10 and 50:10 quantile ratios from 2017 to 2018 (Figure 20) might be due to the transition to administrative data for part of the earnings from 2018 onward. As mentioned before, this change resulted in a considerable number of observations with small earnings, whereas in previous surveys similar individuals report zero earnings. If individuals with such small earnings cover the full first decile, this may explain the jump in the quantile ratios from 2017 to 2018. However, we will qualify this suggestion when discussing the share of self-employed per earnings decile (Figure 24).
The volatility of the Ginis (Figure 19) and the quantile ratios (Figure 20) for the ECHP period (1998-2000) may indicate that these data are plagued by outliers.

All: 90:10 ratio	Male: 90:10 ratio	Female: 90:10 ratio
9	All: 50:10 ratio	Male: 50:10 ratio	Female: 50:10 ratio
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Year
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–60 with positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices. The 2017 and 2018 observations are not connected as most of the employee incomes of 2018 and subsequent years were gathered using tax register data, rather than through survey questions. Self-employment income remains self-reported though. For the SEP and ECHP, gross incomes are reconstructed from net incomes using microsimulation techniques.
Source: SEP 1985–97; ECHP 1999–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figure 21 illustrates that the rise in inequality of gross earnings from 1985 to 1997 is reflected in increasing GICs. Only for the highest deciles is growth declining, but that is apparently not enough to make the Ginis decrease. Comparing inequality between 2003 and 2010, the picture is different for males and females. While the Gini is slightly higher in 2010 than in 2003 for both, the corresponding female GIC is predominantly decreasing (except for the first to second decile). The GIC for males between 2003 and 2010 is increasing (except for the eight to ninth decile).
Also when comparing 2010 with 2017, the picture differs across sexes. Again the female GIC is decreasing, in accordance with the decline in the Gini and the 90:10 and 50:10 quantile ratios. The male GIC is non- monotonic. Notice that when comparing these years, the Gini is slightly lower in 2010, while the 90:10 and 50:10 quantile ratios increased.
From 2018 to 2020, Gini coefficients increased. The GICs are not monotonically increasing, however. It seems that the rise in earnings growth for the first four (females and all) to five deciles (males) is responsible for the increase in the Ginis from 2018 to 2020. Overall, the slope of GICs for the period 2018– 2020 and those for periods 2003–2010 and 2010–2017 have opposite sign.



Figure 21. Annualised growth in gross earnings of workers aged 25–60 by earnings decile, sex and overall, selected periods
1985–97	1997–2000


Male	Female	All
3

2

1

0

-1

-2

Male	Female	All
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1	2	3	4 De5cile 6	7	8	9

2003–10	2010–17


Male	Female	All
2

Male	Female	All
3


1	2

0	1

-1	0

-2	-1

2018–20
3	Male	Female	All 2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7


Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–60 with positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices. For the SEP and ECHP, gross incomes are reconstructed from net incomes using microsimulation techniques. GICs are constructed as annualised growth of the decile	values.
Source: SEP 1985–97; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.

4.5 Self-employment
In this section we investigate the relative importance of self-employment. In contrast to the UK report, we have used the sum of employees and the self-employed as denominator instead of all persons aged 25–60. The figures 22–24 in this section represent the percentage of employees or self-employed among the group of self-employed plus employees. Belgian data do not always allow a distinction to be made between the self-employed with and without personnel, and in cases where it is possible, sample sizes are too small to make reliable distinctions.
Figure 22 shows that the relative number of self-employed among the group of employees and self- employed together is decreasing over time. Only the last four years there is again a small increase in the percentage of self-employed.
Figure 23 breaks down this figures further by education and sex groups. In the period 1985–97 more low- educated than middle-educated women were self-employed, and, in turn, there were more self- employed women within the middle-educated group than among the highly educated. Notwithstanding a few exceptions, the reverse picture holds for males over the entire observation period: there are more self-employed among middle- and highly educated than among the low-educated. From the end of the 1990s this also holds for women. While in 1985, there were still relatively more females self-employed than men, this picture reverses from the end of the 1980s onwards.


Figure 22. Share of employees and self-employed workers, over time
Self-employed	Employees
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


Year
Note:  Employed  and  self-employed  individuals	aged  25–60.  Employment  based  on	self-reported  status.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figure 23. Share of self-employed by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0–2	Male: ISCED 3–4	Male: ISCED 5–8	Male all Female: ISCED 0–2	Female: ISCED 3–4	Female: ISCED 5–8	Female all
30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Year
Note: Employed and self-employed individuals aged 25–60. Employment based on self-reported status.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.
Figure 24 shows that the share of self-employed is predominantly decreasing across the earnings distribution, and this picture does not change over time. Whether the higher incidence of self-employed among the lower earnings deciles reflects a social reality or is a consequence of underestimating or underreporting of incomes by the self-employed cannot of course be answered on the basis of the data at our disposal.
Figure 24 contradicts our conclusions from Figure 20, that the lowest decile would be fully covered by low earnings stemming from administrative registers in 2020, as nearly half of the decile is accounted for by self-employed, whose earnings are self-reported.
Figure 24. Share of self-employed by decile of individual earnings, selected years
1985	1997	2010	2020
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Earnings deciles
Note:  Employed  and  self-employed  individuals	aged  25–60.  Employment  based  on	self-reported  status.
Source: SEP 1985, 1997; EU-SILC 2011 and 2021.

5. Labour market institutions
This section looks at labour market institutions that affect earnings and incomes: minimum wages and collective bargaining.

5.1 Minimum wage and unions
In Belgium, minimum wages are sector- and profession-specific (see Section 2.1). There is also a nationwide minimum wage, but we do not have historical data on this at our disposal. So, we cannot provide a chart on the bite of the minimum wage in Belgium.
Figure 25 illustrates that in 1960 collective bargaining in Belgium already covered 80% of the employees, and this gradually increased to almost full coverage (96%) from 1980 onwards. This persistent high coverage rate has to do with the Belgian consultative economy model that emerged in the aftermath of World War II (see Section 2.1).
Union density is also high, and increased from 40% in 1960 to well over 50% in the late 1970s and early 1980s of last century, to fall again under 50% in 1988. It then increased again in the 1990s to over 55%. In the last two decades, it declined again to about 50%. Belgian has a system of rather powerful national trade unions (their role in the collective bargaining committees is explained in Section 2.1). The high trade union density potentially has to do with the transition of these organisations to mainly offering help with administrative formalities and legal advice to their members, rather than organising strikes and other actions to protect or advance workers’ rights. They also serve as the bodies paying unemployment benefits to their members.


Figure 25. Union density and proportion of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements, over time

Union density	Collective bargaining coverage rate
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0



Note: The sample is all employees.
Source: OECD.Stat: collective bargaining coverage and trade union density.


5.2 The tax and benefit system
All persons who have worked a sufficiently long period without interruption are covered by the Belgian unemployment insurance system. There are three categories of unemployment benefits: for single persons, for persons cohabiting and responsible for other household members (who not necessarily need to be children), and for persons cohabiting without dependent household members. Under the current legislation, benefits for the three categories are identical during the first 3 months. The replacement rate is fixed at 65% during that first period. There is, however, a maximum benefit (reducing the replacement rate for persons with higher income) and a minimum (increasing the replacement rate for persons with low income). Currently, unemployment benefits gradually decline over a maximum period of 4 years, after which they are fixed at a level independent of income. The rate at which they decline is higher for cohabiting persons than for singles and members cohabiting with persons in charge (see also Section 2.2).
In Figures 26–28 we study some properties of the tax and benefit system. More specifically, we calculate an approximation to the average benefit to gross income ratio (Figure 26), the average tax ratio (Figure 27), and the average disposable income to gross income ratio (Figure 28). The first is defined as the sum of all gross benefits (we include unemployment benefits, old age and survival pensions, sickness and disability benefits, social assistance and family allowances) over gross income which is defined as the sum of earnings, private pensions, income from real estate (not including imputed rents from owner- occupied houses), financial capital income, and income from private transfers, plus gross benefits. In Belgium most social benefits are taxable. Child allowances and social assistance are an exception. The denominator of the next two ratios is the same as the first (gross household income). The numerator of the disposable income to gross income ratio is disposable income. Taxes are implicitly defined as gross income (which includes benefits) minus disposable income, so that the tax ratios of Figure 27 are equal to 1 minus the disposable to gross income ratios of Figure 28. We study the properties of these ratios through the distribution of equivalised disposable incomes of the population aged 25–60. More specifically, the benefit, tax and disposable income ratios for each of the four quartiles of this income distribution are represented in Figures 26–28.
Unfortunately these figures do not reproduce some known facts about the evolution of the Belgian tax and benefit system. For example, a number of tax reforms caused a decrease in the average tax rate between 2014 and 2020, which we do not really uncover in Figure 27. On the other hand, the increase in the average tax rate from 1992 to 1997 does correspond to a period of pronounced austerity, with tax increases and reductions in government expenditures, in order to fulfil the access-conditions set by the European Union (Maastricht norm) for the euro zone. Also, the decrease of the tax rates after 2004 can potentially be ascribed to a personal income tax reform in 2001–04 that decreased the average tax rate.
Since 2007 there has been a structural mechanism to adapt social benefits to real wage growth. Decisions are taken every 2 years on how to spend the money allocated in the budget for that purpose. These decisions will determine how the affected persons are spread over the income distribution. Besides that, there were a series of welfare adjustments of social benefits, including a rise in the minimum amounts of those benefits, between 2000 and 2008 (Fasquelle, Festjens and Scholtus, 2008). Because of that, the trough of the benefit ratio for the lowest quartile between 2004 and 2011 comes as a surprise. Admittedly, the budget for adapting social benefits to real wage growth has been used predominantly to adapt the minimum pensions, which have little effect on the population aged 25–60. The declining trend of the benefit ratios in the 1990s is in line with the budgetary austerity policies during that period.
It is most remarkable that the tax and disposable income ratios of the first and second quartile of the equivalised disposable income distribution are close to each other during the last decade.
The data for 1988 seem to be unreliable.

Figure 26. Benefits as a proportion of gross household income, by net household income quartile

Bottom quartile	2nd quartile	3rd quartile	Top quartile
60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Year
Note: Quartiles are constructed on the basis of equivalised disposable income of the household, and each quartile contains 25% of the individuals aged 25–60. The figures in the graph represent the ratio of total gross benefits of the households to which the individuals of a particular quartile belong, to total gross income of those households.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1999–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figure 27. Taxes as a proportion of gross household income, by net household income quartile

Bottom quartile	2nd quartile	3rd quartile	Top quartile
50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15


Year
Note: Quartiles are constructed on the basis of equivalised disposable income of the household, and each quartile contains 25% of the individuals aged 25–60. The figures in the graph represent the ratio of total taxes paid by the households to which the individuals of a particular quartile belong, to total gross income of those households.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1999–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.




Figure 28. Disposable income as a proportion of gross household income, by net household income quartile

Bottom quartile	2nd quartile	3rd quartile	Top quartile
100

90

80

70

60

50

40

Year
Note: Quartiles are constructed on the basis of equivalised disposable income of the household, and each quartile contains 25% of the individuals aged 25–60. The figures in the graph represent the ratio of total disposable of the households to which the individuals of a particular quartile belong, to total gross income of those households.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1999–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.

6. Household incomes
This section looks at trends in household incomes. We start by looking at trends in household composition and the degree of assortative matching, which partly determine household earnings. We then compare trends in household earnings and household disposable income for working households, drawing out the role of the tax and transfer system over time. Finally, we show a set of charts on trends in household income inequality across all households (including those where no-one is in work).

6.1 Trends in household composition
In Figures 29, 32, and 33, we do not use SILC 2019 data, as there is a problem with the identification of the partner in the raw data.
Figure 29 shows the number of persons who are cohabiting as a couple over time. This number has been declining considerably over time, from over 85% to less than 70% today. However, the declining trend seems to have been stopped in the last decade. While at the end of the previous and the beginning of the present century cohabiting with a spouse or partner was more predominant among lower-educated people, this picture reverses during the last decade and a half. Cohabitation continues to decline among the middle-educated, but is on the rise again among the highly educated.
Figure 29. Share married/cohabiting, overall and by education, over time

ISCED 0–2	ISCED 3–4	ISCED 5–8	All
90

85

80

75

70

65

60

55


Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. SILC 2019 data are not used because there is a problem with the identification of partners in the raw data.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–18, 2020–21.



Figure 30 investigates the relation between employment and living in a couple, across the earnings distribution. The yellow lines show the respective percentage of females (left panel) and males (right panel) who are married or cohabitating, per earnings decile. For example, in 1985, 72% of the women aged 25–60 and belonging to the highest earnings decile among the females, are married or cohabitate with a partner (last point on the yellow line of the upper left panel). The yellow triangle represents the same share of cohabitating or married females who do not work (and thus have no earnings). The red lines and squares present the respective shares of the females (left panel) and male (right panel) partners whose partner is working, again across the income decile. For example, 82 percent of married or cohabitating males belonging to the highest earnings decile have a partner who works.
In 2020, both, the probability of cohabiting with a partner (yellow line) and, conditional on being married or cohabitating, the probability that the partner is working (red line), is increasing for males (bottom right panel). For females (bottom left panel) these figures are roughly increasing for the lower earnings deciles and exhibit a little bump between the sixth and tenth decile. The profile of these probabilities is flatter for males in 2004 and 1985 (middle and upper right panel); the conditional probability that the partner works even slightly decreases across deciles in 1985. For females these profiles are almost flat in 2004 and 1985, and the probability of cohabiting with a partner declines through the earnings distribution in 1985. So, over years, the probability to have a partner has become more positively correlated with the own employment status and the place in the earning distribution if working, and the same holds true for the probability that your partner is working, when you are cohabitating.

Figure 30. Share married/cohabiting and share with working partner, by sex and individual gross earnings decile, selected years

Females, 1985	Males, 1985
100	100
90	90
80	80
70 	70
60	60
50	50
40	40
30	30

20
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9  10
Female gross earnings deciles

20
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9  10
Male gross earnings deciles

Females, 2004	Males, 2004
100	100
90	90
80	80
70	70
60 	60
50	50
40	40
30	30

20
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9  10
Female gross earnings deciles

20
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9  10
Male gross earnings deciles

Females, 2020	Males, 2020
100	100
90	90
80	80
70	70
60	60
50	50
40	40
30	30

20
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9  10
Female gross earnings deciles

20
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9  10
Male gross earnings deciles


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. The proportion with a working partner is conditional on being married/cohabiting.
Source: SEP 1985, EU-SILC 2004, 2020.



To investigate the evolution of assortative mating with respect to earnings, Figure 31 shows the average decile rank of the partner of, respectively, male and female decile groups. The slope of such a curve is a measure for the correlation between the earning deciles of the respective partners. The decile rank of non-working partners is coded as a zero. The line corresponding to the more recent years 2018–20 is somewhat steeper than those for the earlier periods (2003–05 and 1988–92). This means that the correlation between earnings deciles of partners has increased. The average decile rank of the males’ partners is also increasing over time, meaning that in more recent years, males cohabit with relatively higher-ranked partners in their gender-specific earnings distribution, irrespective of the males’ own rank in the male-specific earnings distribution.


Figure 31. Mean gross earnings decile of partner/spouse by individual’s gross earnings decile, selected years


Females
Males
7.0	7.0
6.0	6.0
5.0	5.0
4.0	4.0
3.0	3.0
2.0	2.0
1.0	1.0


0.0


0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9  10
Gross earnings decile

0.0


0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9  10
Gross earnings decile

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60 who are married or cohabitate. The horizontal axis indicates the decile group to which a person belongs according to the gender-specific gross earnings distribution of the survey/year to which (s)he belongs; a non- working person belongs to decile group 0. The values on the vertical axes are the averages for each gender-specific earnings decile over a 3-year period. (For the SEP years only two years, 1988 and 1992, are available).
Source: SEP 1988, 1992; EU-SILC 2003–05 and 2018–20.

Figure 32 and 33 give an overview of the position the population aged 25–60 take in the households they belong to. For the ECHP surveys (1998–2001), we cannot isolate adult children from other household members. They are therefore pulled together in the category ‘other’. We do not reproduce the results for SILC 2019 as there is a problem with the identification of the partner in the raw data.
Figure 32 demonstrates the increase in the fraction of singles (with and without children) and also of the increasing importance of adult children in the household. The decomposition by education level in Figure 33 shows that this decline in 'standard' couples which is matched by an increase in singles with or without children, is most outspoken in the subpopulation of the low-and middle educated.


Figure 32. Share of individuals by position in the household, over time

 Single, no children  Single, children  Couple, no children  Couple, children  Adult child  Other
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Children are persons in a ‘child’ relationship to the reference person of the household, or
bear the relationship “child” to another person in the household (for SILC only).
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–18, 2020–21.



Figure 33. Share of individuals by position in the household, by sex and education, over time

Female ISCED 0–2	Male ISCED 0–2

100

80

60

40

20

0

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0



Year

Year



100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Female ISCED 3–4	Male ISCED 3–4
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
	
0



Year

Year



100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Female ISCED 5–8	Male ISCED 5–8
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
	
0

Year
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Children are persons in a ‘child’ relationship to the reference person of the household,
or bear the relationship “child” to another person in the household (for SILC only).
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–18, 2020–21.


6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households
Figure 34 shows the share of persons living in a household where at least one person works (defined as a ‘working household’). Overall, the proportion of persons living in a working household has been rising in the last decade, while it was relatively constant at the end of the previous century. Most striking is the fact that the proportion of persons living in working households is consistently higher, the higher the level of education. Moreover, this gap has widened during the last decade.
Figure 34. Share of individuals in a working household, overall and by education, over time

ISCED 0–2	ISCED 3–4	ISCED 5–8	All
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60

Year
Note: Individuals aged 25–60. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work, which in turn is based on self-reported status.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figure 35 shows the median equivalised gross household earnings (the sum of all earnings in the household) for working households, and the median equivalised disposable income for both working and non-working households. Medians are calculated with respect to the population of persons aged 25–60 belonging to working households, non-working households, or overall. Household earnings are the sum of all earnings of household members.
The figure illustrates that the tax and benefit system is redistributing income from working households to non-working households. Nevertheless, the gap between equivalised disposable income of individuals living in a household with working members and of those living in households in which nobody works, widens over time.


Figure 35. Median real gross household earnings and disposable household income among working households, over time

Gross household earnings (working HHs)	Disposable household income (working HHs) Disposable household income (non-working HHs)	Disposable household income (all HHs)
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0


Year
Note: Individuals aged 25–60 in working households (yellow and green lines), non-working households (blue lines), and all households (red line). A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work, which in turn is based on the self-declared activity status of the individuals. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale, and are expressed in 2019 prices.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1998–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.


Figure 36 shows GICs for equivalised gross household earnings and equivalised disposable income of the population of persons aged 25–60 who belong to working households. The deciles are calculated for this population. The growth of real equivalised disposable incomes between 1985 and 1997, 2003 and 2010, and 2018 and 2020 is higher than the corresponding growth of gross equivalised earnings. The reverse happens between 1997 and 2000 and between 2010 and 2017. The growth pattern of equivalised gross household earnings between 1985 and 1997 is unequalising, while that of equivalised disposable income is equalising. For other periods, there is no such an opposing pattern. The periods 1997–2000 and 2010– 17 are characterised by an unequalising growth pattern of gross equivalised household earnings. The growth pattern of equivalised disposable income is equalising during the period 2003–10.

Figure 36. Annualised growth in real gross household earnings and household disposable income for working households, by deciles, selected years

1985–97	1997–2000
6	6
5	5
4	4
3	3
2	2


1
0
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9
Decile

1
0
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9
Decile


2.5
2.0
1.5

2003–10	2010–17
2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0	1.0


0.5
0.0
-0.5

0.5

0.0

Decile	-0.5






Decile

2018–2020
3

2

1

0

-1

-2
Decile

Note: Individuals aged 25–60 in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Deciles are for the population of persons aged 25–60 belonging to working households. Deciles are constructed separately for equivalised gross household earnings and equivalised disposable income.
Source: SEP 1988, 1992; ECHP 1998, 2001; EU-SILC 2004, 2011, 2018, 2019, 2021.


6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households
In the present subsection we concentrate on the evolution of inequality of equivalised disposable incomes within the population aged 25–60 years. There was a continuous real growth in equivalised disposable income over the entire period, with only four exceptions, 2011, 2013, 2016, and 2020. Figure 37 suggests further that the gap between equivalised disposable incomes of higher educated people and that of lower (middle and low) educated people widens over time.
Figure 37. Median real disposable household income for all households, by education, over time

ISCED 0–2	ISCED 3–4	ISCED 5–8	All
35


30


25


20


15


10

Year
Note: Individuals aged 25–60. Yearly incomes are in 2019 prices. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence	scale.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1999–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.

Figure 38 displays the Gini, the risk of poverty (head count ratio), the top 1% share, and quantile ratios for equivalised disposable income of the population aged 25–60. For the Gini (full blue line), negative values are not included. The dashed blue line displays the Gini calculated on the basis of a censored version of the equivalised disposable income distribution: negative values have been set to zero and incomes among the top 1% are replaced by the 99th percentile value.
First, we observe that the Gini coefficient is relatively constant over time. The upward jump in inequality of gross earnings when SILC began to collect part of the incomes through administrative data in 2019, incomes from 2018 (cf. Figures 19 and 20), does not turn up in the equivalised disposable income evolution of inequality.
The inequality (blue lines) and poverty (green lines) statistics do not move in parallel. This illustrates that poverty and inequality are quite different notions. The figures for the top 1% share are too volatile to draw reliable conclusions.
Figure 38. Gini, relative poverty and top 1% share of net household income for all households, over time

Gini	Gini (censored)	Relative poverty	Income share of the top 1% (right axis)
35	7

30	6

25	5

20	4

15	3

10	2

5	1

0	0

Year

Note: Individuals aged 25–60. The calculation of the Gini does not include negative incomes but does include zeros. The winsorised Gini uses a censored equivalised disposable income distribution, with negative values set to zero and incomes above the 99th percentile set to the 99th percentile value. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with less than 60% of the median of the equivalised income distribution. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Source: SEP 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1999–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figure 39 shows the 90:10, 90:50, and 50:10 quantile ratios. Observe that the 50:10 ratio is systematically higher than the 90:50 ratio, indicating that inequality in the lower middle part of the distribution might be as important as inequality in the upper middle part, for the overall level of inequality. Between 1985 and 1997 it is the bottom decile that is causing the movements in the 90:10 and 50:10 ratio. For the period 1998–2000 the ratios indicate that incomes at the top increased faster than the median and the bottom decile. Between 2008 and 2017, the 90:10 and 50:10 ratios exhibit an increasing trend, while the 90:50 ratio is relatively constant. This indicates especially that equivalised disposable incomes at the bottom of the distribution are lagging behind those from the upper half of the distribution during that period.

Figure 39. Percentile ratios of equivalised disposable household incomes for all households, over time

90:10 ratio	50:10 ratio	90:50 ratio
3.50
3.25
3.00
2.75
2.50
2.25
2.00
1.75
1.50

Year
Note:	Individuals	aged	25–60.
Source: SEP : 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997; ECHP 1999–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.

7. Immigrant outcomes
In this section we compare the situation of natives with those of immigrants. A person is defined to be an immigrant if (s)he is not born in Belgium. Note, however, that the reference population of the surveys are people listed in the national register. Undocumented persons and asylum seekers awaiting a decision on their request for refugee status are not included in these surveys. Years in Figures 40–42 refer to survey years, not income years.
We have no information on the migration status for respondents belonging to the SEP waves of our data (1985, 1988, 1992, 1992). We therefore use data from the earliest year of the ECHP onwards (1994) in this section. For the ECHP surveys (1994–2001), there is a non-negligible proportion of respondents (7– 12%) whose migration status we do not know. They are counted as non-migrants.


Figure 40. Share of immigrants in the population, over time

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

Year
Note: Individuals aged 25–60. An immigrant is someone not born in Belgium.
Source: ECHP 1994–95, 1997–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



In Figure 41 we study the share of the migrant population across the distribution of equivalised disposable income. The more recent curves are steeper, indicating that migrants are more concentrated in the lower income deciles than before. With the exception of the eight decile point in 2020, the overall position of the curves for 2020 and 2010 is above the ones for 1995 and 2000 because the number of immigrants has continuously increased.



Figure 41. Share of immigrants in population, by equivalised disposable income distribution over time

1995	2000	2010	2020
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Equivalised disposable income decile
Note: Individuals aged 25–60. An immigrant is someone not born in Belgium.
Source: ECHP 1995, 2000; EU-SILC 2010, 2020.



Not surprisingly, migrants are lagging behind natives in almost all outcomes (Figure 42). The only exception are the personal earnings of female migrants in 2004. In 2004 also, migrants scored lowest vis- à-vis natives in terms of employment. While increased from 0.69 to 0.74, the relative employment rate of migrant females continued to be the lowest outcome in 2010 and 2020. For males, however, the ratio of equivalised disposable income of migrants to that of natives became even lower than the corresponding employment rate ratio in 2010 and 2020. While the ratio of female migrants’ to natives’ employment rate has gone up from 0.69 in 2004 to 074 in 2020 and their number of hours worked (conditional on working) has become approximately equal to that of natives in 2020, the personal earnings (conditional on working) ratio deteriorated from 1.02 to 0.87. So, while relatively more female migrants have a job in 2020 than in 2004 and the labour time of their jobs also increased relatively to that of native females, they earn relatively less. This implies that migrant females have increasingly been sorted into relatively less paying jobs. The education gap between migrants and natives is now larger than in 2004.

Figure 42. Outcomes of immigrants relative to native-born population, by sex and over time
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0





 2004  2010  2020

Note: Individuals aged 25–60. An immigrant is someone not born in Belgium. A bar higher (lower) than 1 indicates the outcome is higher (lower) among the immigrant population. Hours per week and personal earnings are conditional on working.
Source: EU-SILC 2004, 2010, and 2020.

8. References
De Groote, O. and Declercq, K., 2021. Tracking and specialization of high schools: Heterogeneous effects of school choice. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 36( 7), 898–916.
Fasquelle, N., Festjens, M.-J. and Scholtus, B., 2008. Welvaartsbinding van de sociale zekerheidsuitkeringen: Een overzicht van de recente ontwikkelingen. Federal Planbureau (FPB) Working Paper 8-08.
Lakner, C. and Milanovic, B., 2016. Global income distribution: From the Fall of the Berlin Wall to the Great Recession. World Bank Economic Review, 30(2), 203–32.

Ravallion, M. and Chen, S., 2003. Measuring pro-poor growth. Economics Letters, 78(1), 93–9.

9. Data appendix

For Belgium most of the figures are based on three sets of microdata on living conditions: the Socio- Economic Panel (SEP) covers the years 1985, 1988 (telephone survey), 1992, and 1997; the European Community Household Panel (ECHP) covers the years 1994–2001; and the EU Statistics on Income and Living Conditions (EU-SILC) covers the period 2004–21.
The harmonisation and concatenation of these datasets is part of the BELSPO-BRAIN project BE-PARADIS (B2/191/P3/BE-PARADIS). Differences in methodologies between surveys and, possibly, imperfections in the construction of the sample weights for the ECHP result in quite large differences in results for the same statistic drawn from different surveys for overlapping years. We are therefore reluctant to draw time trends connecting results from different surveys. For the period 1985–97 we use the SEP. For 1998– 2001 we use the ECHP, and 2004–21 is covered by EU-SILC.
For the ECHP and EU-SILC income information applies to the (full) year preceding the survey year. For the SEP it applies to the month preceding the moment the interview. For the SEP and ECHP, gross incomes are reconstructed from answers on net incomes in the questionnaire using microsimulation techniques. For EU-SILC, gross incomes result from questionnaires up to 2017 (EU-SILC 2018). From 2019 onwards (2018 for incomes) data on gross incomes from employment, pensions, and social security benefits are drawn from tax registers. Because of this methodological change in the SILC survey we do not connect the 2017 and 2018 points in the figures based on this information.
For the ECHP, we also have information on incomes in the month preceding the interview. We use these for the calculation of hourly wages, as this information is more closely related to the actual job status, we have available. While this information on actual earnings during the survey also exists for the SILC, it is not available to us. Consequently, we have to rely on income information from the previous year to calculate hourly wages of employees for their actual job.


10. Appendix: 25–74 age group

In this appendix a limited number of figures from the main text are reproduced for the population of persons aged 25–74.
Figure 43 presents growth incidence curves of hourly wages of employees and corresponds to Figure 13 in the main text. The overall image of this figure is barely distinguishable from that of Figure 13. Figure 44 shows the annualised growth in average number of hours worked by employees by wage decile. It corresponds to Figure 16. Again, both figures are very similar. Figure 45 presents the Gini coefficients of individual earnings and is once more similar to Figure 19. Figure 46 corresponds to Figure 21 and shows the growth incidence curves of individual earnings. In this case, there are some noticeable differences from the main text figures for people aged 25–60. For example, the drop in earnings among the first decile between 2018 and 2020, for women and overall, is much less steep when including 61–74-year-olds who are still working, and smaller than that of men.

Figure 43. Growth in hourly wages among employees aged 25–74 by wage decile, overall and by sex, selected periods

1985–97	1997–2001


2.5

Male	Female	All


2.5

Male	Female	All

2.0	2.0
1.5	1.5


1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0








Decile

1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0








Decile

2003–10	2010–17


2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0

Male	Female	All











Decile

1.0


0.5


0.0


-0.5

Male	Female	All

Decile





2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0

2018–20
Male	Female	All

Decile



Note: Employees aged 25–74. Employment based on self-reported status and conditional on reporting positive income from labour and positive number of hours worked. Wages are in 2019 prices.
Source: SEP 1985, 1997; ECHP 1997, 2001; EU-SILC 2004, 2011, 2018, 2019, and 2021.



Figure 44. Growth in mean hours worked among employees aged 25–74 by wage decile, overall and by sex, selected years
1985–97	1997–2001



1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

Male	Female	All












Decile

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3

Male	Female	All











Decile

2004–10	2010–17


1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-8



3

Male	Female	All











Decile
2018–20
Male	Female	All

1.0


0.5


0.0


-0.5


-1.0

Male	Female	All

Decile


2

1

0

-1

-2
Decile

Note: Sample is employees aged 25–74. Employment based on self-reported status, conditional on positive hours work reported and positive wages. The annualised growth is calculated using the average hours worked per wage decile.
Source: SEP 1985, 1997; ECHP 1997, 2001; EU-SILC 2004, 2010, 2017, 2018, and 2020.

Figure 45. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings of workers aged 25–74, overall and by sex, over time

All	Male	Female
0.46

0.42

0.38

0.34

0.30

0.26

0.22


Year
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–74 with positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices. The 2017 and 2018 observations are not connected as most of the employee’s incomes of 2018 and subsequent years were gathered using tax register data, rather than through survey questions. Self-employment income remains self-reported though. For the SEP and ECHP, gross incomes are reconstructed from net incomes using microsimulation techniques.
Source: SEP 1985–97; ECHP 1999–2001; EU-SILC 2004–21.



Figure 46. Annualised growth in gross earnings of workers aged 25–74 by earnings decile, overall and sex, selected periods
1985–97	1997–2000


2.5

1.5

0.5

-0.5

-1.5

-2.5

Male	Female	All












Decile

Male	Female	All
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1	2	3	4 De5cile 6	7	8	9

2003–10	2010–17


Male	Female	All
2

3	Male	Female	All


1	2

0	1

-1	0


-2
Decile

-1
Decile





3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7

2018–20
Male	Female	All

Decile


Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–74 with positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices. For the SEP and ECHP, gross incomes are reconstructed from net incomes using microsimulation techniques. GICs are constructed as annualised growth of the decile values.
Source: SEP 1985, 1997; ECHP 1998, 2001; EU-SILC 2004, 2011, 2018, 2019, and 2021.








lnstitute for Fiscal Studies

Country Studies: Inequalities in Europe and North America
A parallel study to the IFS Deaton Review

Kelly Foley David Green Craig Riddell




Inequality in Canada: 1976 -
2022






















Inequality in Canada: 1976–2022
Kelly Foley
University of Saskatchewan David A. Green
University of British Columbia and Institute for Fiscal Studies
W. Craig Riddell1
University of British Columbia
Contents
Inequality in Canada: 1976–2022	1
1. Executive summary	2
2. Institutional setting	4
3. Notes on measurement and definitions	7
4. Individual employment and earnings	9
4.1 Trends in employment	9
4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)	13
4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)	19
4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self- employed)	21
4.2 Self-employment	25
5. Institutions	28
5.1 Minimum wage and unions	28
5.2 Role of direct taxes and benefits (financial transfers from the state)	29
6. Household incomes	33
6.1 Trends in household composition	33
6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households	38
6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households	40
7. Immigration	43
8. References	46
9. Data appendix	47
10. Appendix: 25–69 and 25–74 age groups	49









1 This work is supported by the framework of the Trans-Atlantic Platform (http://www.transatlanticplatform.com/) by the French National Research Agency, the United States’ National Science Foundation, the United Kingdom’s Economic and Social Research Council, Canada’s Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, the Academy of Finland and Germany’ s Federal Ministry of Education and Research. The Canadian part of this grant, funded by the SSHRC, is grant number 2005-2021-0002. The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not reflect the opinions of any sponsoring agency.
© Institute for Fiscal Studies	1

1. Executive summary
1.1 Overview of trends
We summarise key facts about the labour market and the evolution of inequality in Canada over the period from 1976 to the present utilising various data sources, principally the monthly Labour Force Survey (LFS).
During this time period income and wealth inequality rose substantially – for example, the Gini coefficient of individual market income (for both genders) increased by about 22% between the late 1970s and the late 1990s, and subsequently declined modestly (see Figure 19). Similar changes took place for inequality in family income adjusted for family size (see Appendix Figure 49). However, the rise in inequality was very uneven over this time period. Cyclical changes in economic activity played an important role, as did changes in the tax and transfer system that in some periods strongly offset – and in others exacerbated – changes in market income inequality.
Canada experienced two major recessions during this period – one in the early 1980s and the other in the early 1990s. By most measures the 1981–82 downturn was the worst of the post-war period until the COVID shock in 2020. The 1990–92 recession was shallower but longer in duration, and recovery was much slower than in the early 1980s. Both downturns left income inequality permanently higher (Figure 19). In the early 1980s the Gini of market income increased between 1981 and 1983 and gradually declined during the subsequent boom – but even at the cyclical peak in 1989 the Gini had not returned to its pre-recession level. This ‘ratcheting up’ was more pronounced during the 1990s, with the market income Gini rising from 1990 to 1992 and then continuing to increase in the subsequent recovery and expansion.
Offsetting the growth in market income inequality in the 1980s and early 1990s were increases in transfers from income support programmes, especially provincial social assistance (‘welfare’) and federal unemployment insurance (UI, now called ‘Employment Insurance’ or EI). In addition, new personal income tax surcharges on high earners helped dampen inequality growth. Thus, for example, disposable family income inequality was unchanged between 1976 and 1996, despite an increase in market income inequality of over 14% during those two decades (Appendix Figure 49).
However, in the late 1990s policymakers’ concern about high debt levels and the rising share of the population receiving social assistance and EI led to major cutbacks in both major income support programmes, as well as removal of the income tax surcharges on those earning high incomes. The consequences of this sharp reversal are evident in Appendix Figure 49. Between 1995 and 2001 the Gini of disposable family income inequality rose by 8.5%, substantially more than the 2% increase in market income inequality.
The Canadian and US economies are highly integrated, and trade with the US constitutes a substantial amount of Canada’s economic activity. However, Canada’s economy is only one-tenth the size of that of the US, so is heavily influenced by developments south of the border. As former Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau stated, ‘When the US sneezes, Canada catches a cold.’ This statement certainly applied in the 1980s and 1990s, but since 2000 downturns have hit much harder south of the border. In 2001 the US experienced a recession associated with the IT crash; Canada, meanwhile, had a mild slowdown that lasted only one quarter. During the 2008–09 global financial crisis, unemployment increased substantially more in the US and many other countries than in Canada. An important factor contributing to relatively favourable aggregate performance was the resource boom of 1999–2014. By raising wages in the vicinity of the bottom of the earnings distribution (particularly low-skilled men) the resource boom was inequality- reducing, contributing to the modest decline in the market income Gini from its 1998 peak of 0.45 to 0.43 at the end of the resource boom.
Another key factor in the evolution of income inequality has been the minimum wage. As noted in the Section 5, minimum wages are principally set at the provincial (and territorial) level so vary regionally at a point in time and in evolution over time. Nonetheless, in some time periods the weighted average real minimum wage has fallen steadily over time, and in other time periods the reverse has occurred (see Figure 3 in Foley, Green and Riddell, forthcoming). Allowing minimum



wages to fall in real terms from the late 1970s to the late 1980s contributed to rising inequality; likewise, substantial growth in the real minimum wage in recent years has contributed to the levelling off and modest decline in income inequality since 2000. The recent reduction in wage inequality is especially large (see Figure 11).

2. Institutional setting
Canada is a federal state, with 10 provinces – with populations ranging in size from Prince Edward Island’s 150,000 inhabitants (less than most Canadian cities) to Ontario with a population of over 14 million – as well as three territories located in the northern part of the country. Most labour market policies and programmes such as minimum wages and other labour standards fall under provincial (or territorial) jurisdiction, though there are exceptions as noted below. In addition, about 10% of the workforce – those employed in activities with a national or inter-provincial dimension such as rail, inter-provincial trucking, shipping, airports and banking – are federally regulated. Our summary of institutions necessarily provides a broad overview of a heterogeneous system. Also noteworthy is that there is considerable federal government financial involvement in some areas of provincial jurisdiction such as healthcare and education.
This involvement came with spending requirements before the mid-1990s but now comes in the form of block grants.
Canada is a small open economy with major export markets being the US and Asia. It also has a substantial resource sector, so its economy is subject to the booms and busts of natural resources, especially oil and natural gas in recent decades. These periods have pronounced regional effects and tend to be associated with wage and employment increases.
A good ‘rule of thumb’ is that both labour market policies and outcomes in Canada fall between the extremes of the free-market orientation of the US and the highly developed and relatively generous welfare states of the Scandinavian countries. While this is a useful starting point in many cases, there are exceptions as discussed below.
Unemployment insurance (called Employment Insurance since a major reform in 1996), is an exception to both of these generalisations. First, it is a federal rather than a provincial programme. Second, although comparing UI systems across countries is challenging due to the many parameters involved, most such assessments conclude that since major reforms to the programme in the 1990s Canada has one of the least generous UI programs among the OECD countries (e.g. Banting, 2012). Relative to most OECD countries, Canada’s EI program has relatively short qualifying periods for entitlement, but benefit levels are lower and benefit durations shorter (Van Audenrode et al., 2005). It also includes a 2-week waiting period before receiving benefits that is longer than most countries. EI is a contribution-based programme with covered employees contributing about 2% of ‘insurable earnings’ (up to a threshold) and employers contributing about 2.8% of earnings. This places Canada among the OECD countries with the lowest combined contribution rates.
The UI/EI program has evolved substantially over time, with the period from its inception in 1940 to the mid-1970s being one of expansion of coverage and increased generosity of benefits. A major reform in the early 1970s greatly expanded access, eased eligibility rules for seasonal workers, increased generosity and added sick-leave and maternity benefits. A particularly important change was the introduction of a benefit structure based on the unemployment rate in narrowly defined ‘UI regions’ such that the entrance requirement (number of weeks of work needed to qualify for benefits) was lower and the maximum duration of benefits higher in regions with high unemployment rates. Kuhn and Riddell (2010) utilise the natural experiment yielded by the relatively homogeneous region of the US state of Maine and the Canadian province of New Brunswick – but separated by a border – to examine the impacts of the different evolution of UI programs in the two countries. Seasonal employment, especially in fishing and forestry, was traditionally important on both sides of the border. They conclude that the 1971–72 changes greatly increased the incidence of part-year work in New Brunswick relative to the control state of Maine. Although some of the 1971–72 provisions were subsequently amended, regional variation in both entrance requirements and maximum duration of benefits – and the generous subsidies to part-year seasonal employment – remains a prominent feature of Canada’s EI programme.
For the 20 years following 1976, the EI system contracted, with reduced benefit generosity and more restrictive eligibility criteria. A major reform in 1996 led to further restrictions, including the



disentitlement of people who quit their job. The fraction of the unemployed receiving EI benefits – a common measure of coverage – averaged about 80% between 1976 and 1990 but fell to 45% by 1997 and has since drifted down to below 40%. Thus, the importance of UI/EI in Canada’s social safety net has declined significantly over time.
Income or social assistance (IA/SA) is the other major income support programme for the working-age population. Like EI, these programmes underwent substantial change over our sample period. Unlike EI, they fall under provincial jurisdiction and are operated by the provinces/territories. The introduction in 1966 of the federal Canada Assistance Plan (CAP) which provided for 50–50 cost-sharing of IA/SA expenditures to provinces that complied with the CAP provisions (which all provinces chose to do)2 was a major step forward in the expansion of the ‘welfare state’ in Canada. It also resulted in substantial homogeneity of provincial welfare programmes. However, following the severe recessions of the early 1980s and 1990s, by the mid- 1990s over 12% of the population under age 65 were receiving IA/SA versus approximately 6% in the late 1970s. There was considerable concern at the time about growing dependence on IA/SA. The federal government withdrew from the CAP and replaced it with block funding of healthcare, education and IA/SA (referred to as the Canada Health and Social Transfer). As a result, provinces had much more flexibility in the design of their IA/SA programmes and these programmes had to compete with healthcare and education for provincial funding. Provinces responded by restricting entry and encouraging more rapid exit from welfare, including greater use of financial incentives to ‘make work pay’. Federal incentives to encourage work were also added through childcare benefits for families with working parents. The consequences of these policy changes were dramatic – the social assistance rate fell from over 12% in 1994 to less than 6% in 2008, and has remained in the 6–7% range since that time. Currently, in many provinces the main demographic group receiving IA/SA are those receiving disability benefits (see Foley, Green and Riddell, forthcoming, for the case of the province of British Columbia).
Minimum wages and other labour standards such as those relating to hours of work, overtime pay, holidays, and occupational health and safety principally fall under provincial jurisdiction, with the exception of industries engaged in activities with a national or inter-provincial nature such as rail, inter-provincial trucking, airports, and banking (about 10% of the workforce). Large changes over time in the real minimum wage are evident in all provinces (see Foley, Green and Riddell, forthcoming), with rapid increases in the early 1970s before peaking in late 1970s and then falling dramatically for more than a decade, a result of not adjusting the nominal minimum wage during a period of high inflation. After bottoming out in the late 1980s, there were modest ups and downs in the real minimum wage until the early 2000s. Since 2003 the employment-weighted real minimum wage has increased steadily and substantially from about $8 per hour in 2003 to $13 in 2019 (in 2018 dollars), with the most dramatic changes taking place since 2017. Although overall trends have been broadly similar across provinces, there are some noteworthy exceptions in the larger provinces. Annual updating of the provincial minimum wage, as well as adjustments for increases in the cost of living, are more common in the four Atlantic provinces and the prairie provinces of Manitoba and Saskatchewan.
Laws and regulations relating to unions and collective bargaining also fall under provincial jurisdiction, with the exception of the federally regulated sector. Although laws relating to unions and strike activity date back to the 1800s, Canada did not legally recognise the rights of workers to form and join unions until the Second World War, during which time the federal government had nationwide jurisdiction over labour matters under the emergency provisions of the War Measures Act. During the war unionisation in Canada grew rapidly, and this continued in the early post-war period as provinces implemented legislation similar to the Wartime Labour Legislation order. Unlike the US, where unionisation began its long decline in the mid-1950s, the Canadian unionisation rate reached a peak of over 35% in the mid-1980s and has been slowly declining since. By 2019, prior to the COVID shock, overall union coverage was below 30%. Over the past five decades unionisation has declined substantially in the private sector but remained stable or

2 Two key provisions of the CAP were that families that demonstrated they were in need of assistance could not be denied and families migrating into a province from another province be treated the same as those living in the province.

grown in the public sector, resulting in an enormous gap in union coverage – less than 16% in the private sector versus 76% in the public sector. Almost 60% of the unionised workforce are now employed in the public sector even though that sector accounts for only about 20% of total employment.
Canada is also a heavily immigrant nation, with the proportion of 25–54-year-olds who were born outside of Canada increasing steadily from 22% in 2006 to 30% in 2022. There is little evidence of immigration having effects on the wages of non-immigrants, but its sheer size has altered the growth rate and skill composition of the workforce. Through the use of its point system and other controls, Canada’s immigrant workforce is more skilled than is observed in the US.
Finally, both health and education are mainly publicly provided in Canada. The nationalised health system is almost unique in having not only public provision of services but also a restriction to only allowing the government to pay for healthcare. In education, almost all universities are publicly funded and only 7.6% of high school students attended private schools in 2019.

3. Notes on measurement and definitions

Unit of analysis and sample:

The sample is individuals aged between 25 and 59 inclusive, except where otherwise indicated. For figures on wages and earnings, the sample is further restricted to individuals (or households where applicable) with strictly positive wages or earnings, respectively. There are no further restrictions for the household income figures.

Individuals are the unit of analysis throughout. For example, for equivalised household income, each individual is allocated their respective equivalised household income, so that income is counted as many times as there are individuals aged 25–59 in the household.

In the figures where we winsorise, we allocate all observations above the 99th percentile the amount equal to the 99th percentile. Otherwise, distributions are not trimmed.

Outcome definitions:
Employment rate: the fraction of the population that is employed according to self-reported employment status.

Earnings: gross annual real individual earnings among those who are employed (including self-employed) and have strictly positive real earnings. Annual earnings, from all employment, are self-reported or taken directly from tax records. See the data appendix for further details on differences in reporting of annual earnings.

Hours of work: usual/ typical paid hours worked in the reference week in all jobs, excluding paid overtime, among those who are employed and have strictly positive real earnings. Excludes self-employed workers. The reference week is the week that contains the 15th of the month.

Wages: individual real gross hourly wages in the respondent’s main job. Excludes self- employed workers. Hourly wages are directly reported for those paid by the hour and are constructed for others using usual hours worked.

Disposable household income (household equivalised income after deducting taxes and adding benefits and tax credits)

o The main measure of household income used in this report is income before housing costs have been deducted, and after direct taxes and transfers have been deducted from or added to household income.

o Income includes total annual earnings from employment, profit or loss from self- employment, government transfers, including tax credits, Employment Insurance Benefits and Child Benefits, income from public and private pensions, investment income, maintenance payments, and income from grants and scholarships.

o Income is net of total federal and provincial income tax payable, after taking into account exemptions, deductions, non-refundable tax credits, and the refundable Quebec abatement.

o Incomes are equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale, normalised to a single individual.

Splits:
Sex: female, male
Education: Education is split into three groups: low, medium, and high education, corresponding to ISCED 0–2, ISCED 3–5, and ISCED 6–8, respectively. ISCED 3–5 includes high school graduates, post-secondary non-graduates, and graduates with a trade certificate or diploma from a vocational school or apprenticeship training, non-university certificate or diploma from a community college or collège d'enseignement general et professionnel (CEGEP), or university certificate below bachelor’s level. ISCED 6–8 includes graduates with a university degree or certificate above bachelor's degree.

Household type: Single without dependent children; single with dependent children; couples without dependent children; couples with dependent children; adult child; other. Parents of adult children go in the ‘other’ category. A dependent child is a child aged 0–15 or 16–19 and in full-time education, living with parents.

Unavailable measures:
Employer labour costs and constributions to social security are not observed in the data sources we use. As such, we are unable to show the following figures:

o Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings and total employer cost, over time

o Growth in gross earnings and employer cost by earnings percentile

o Disposable income as a proportion of gross income and employer social security contributions, by net household income quartile.

4. Individual employment and earnings
4.1 Trends in employment
This section looks at trends in individual employment, education, wages, and earnings. With respect to earnings, we first look separately at hourly wages and hours worked, before bringing them together in a set of charts on earnings inequality. Due to a lack of reliable data on hours worked for the self-employed, we restrict the analysis of wages and hours to employees, but include both employees and the self-employed in the analysis on total earnings.
Figure 1. Employment rates by age and sex, over time
Male, 15–24	Male, 25–59	Male, 60–69
Female, 15–24	Female, 25–59	Female, 60–69
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 15–69.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1976–2022.


Figure 1 reports employment rates from 1976 to 2022 for youth, prime-aged, and older individuals, separately for men and women. Broadly, the figure reveals a convergence in the employment gap between men and women. For the youngest group, this male–female difference is relatively small in the mid-1970s and is virtually non-existent by the early 1990s. For both older and prime-aged individuals, the convergence in the male–female employment gap slows down considerably after 2000. In the period prior to 2000, the gap in employment rates narrows for individuals aged 60– 69 because employment rates were falling among men. By contrast, the narrowing within the prime-aged group is driven by rising employment among women and a slow decline in employment among men. Another aggregate trend evident in the figure is the rise in employment rates among older men and women since 2000. More recently, the declines in employment rates that coincide with the COVID-19 pandemic are sharpest for young men and women, but in all groups by 2022 employment levels have generally rebounded to or above their pre-2020 levels.

The age profiles in employment rates are compared across men and women in Figure 2. In each panel, employment rates by age are plotted for five different cross-sections: 1977, 1987, 1997, 2007, and 2019. For men, in the right-hand panel, the shape of the profile is very similar in different years, especially when contrasted with the changing profile shapes for women (left- hand panel). Between 1977 and 1997, the profile shifts down for men; employment rates were falling over these decades at all ages. This trend reverses and the profiles are at higher employment levels in both 2007 and 2019. This coincides with the commodity boom that benefited the resource sector with positive spillovers into other sectors (Green et al., 2019).
The changing shape in women’s employment profiles reflects an evolution in the propensity to exit the labour market in prime childbearing and childrearing ages. In 1997, there is a sharp

decline in employment rates for those older than 22. For those aged 22–57 in 1987, similar-aged women were far less likely to be employed in 1997. Keeping in mind that women who are 32 in 1977 are 42 in 1987, the comparison of these two cross-sections suggests that successive cohorts were both less likely to exit employment and more likely to return to employment. By 2007 and 2019, the profile for women has a similar shape to the profiles for men, though at lower levels.
Figure 2. Employment rates over life cycle by sex, selected years
1977	1987	1997	2007	2019


100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Female











Age


100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Male












Age


Note: Sample is individuals aged 15–69. Ages are grouped in 5-year bins, and the midpoint of the bin is labelled on the horizontal axis.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1977–2019.


Figure 3. Educational attainment over time
ISCED 0–2	ISCED 3–5	ISCED 6–8
70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0


Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1990–2022.
We show how the education shares evolved in Figure 3; we begin in 1990 because the way that the highest level of completed education was collected in the Canadian Labour Force Survey substantially changed in 1990. We report three categories of completed education



corresponding to International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) levels 0–2, 3–5, and 6–8. Canada has a particularly large share of working-aged individuals who have completed levels 3–5, which corresponds to what would be referred to as high school, college, or CEGEP in the Canadian context. This share changes little between 1990 and 2022, particularly in comparison to the lower and higher levels of education. Figure 3 reveals a steep decline in the share with levels 0–2, falling from nearly 30% in 1990 to roughly 6% in 2022. Mirroring the falling share of less-educated individuals is a large increase in the share with an undergraduate degree or higher (ICED levels 6–8), rising roughly 24 percentage points to reach nearly 40% by 2022.
In Figure 4, we show how these aggregate trends vary by sex. The lowest-education share is roughly the same in both sexes in 1990, but falls more rapidly for women. Women are less likely than men, in 1990, to have completed ISCED levels 6–8, but that reverses in the mid-2000s. By 2022, 42% of women have completed a university degree compared to 35% of men. Of that roughly 7 percentage point difference, 2 points are because men are more likely to have completed only ISCED levels 0–2. Because the share with ISCED levels 0–2 is very small, proportionately the difference is large. Although women are 67% less likely than men to obtain at most ISCED level 2, as will become clear in the next set of figures, the negative consequences – in terms of wage and employment outcomes – of low levels of education are more substantial for women.
Figure 4. Educational attainment by sex, over time


Male: ISCED 0–2	Male: ISCED 3–5	Male: ISCED 6–8
Female: ISCED 0–2	Female: ISCED 3–5	Female: ISCED 6–8
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1990–2022.

With those education trends in mind, we now show employment rates over the same time period for each of the three education levels first for men and women combined in Figure 5 and then separately in Figure 6. Employment levels are substantially higher for the most-educated group and the effects of the economic downturns that occurred in 1990, 2008, and the COVID-19- related shutdowns are muted in this group relative to the other two groups. Employment rates are substantially lower for those with less than a high school diploma (ISCED 0–2), falling below 65% throughout this period.
Figure 5. Employment rates by education, over time
ISCED 0–2	ISCED 3–5	ISCED 6–8
90

85

80

75

70

65

60

55


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1990–2022.


Figure 6. Employment rates by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0–2	Male: ISCED 3–5	Male: ISCED 6–8
Female: ISCED 0–2	Female: ISCED 3–5	Female: ISCED 6–8
100

90

80

70

60

50

40


Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59.



Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1990–2022.
When we disaggregate by sex in Figure 6, the same general trends over time persist, with the exception of a roughly 10 point increase, between 1990 and 2020, in the employment rate among women who have achieved ISCED levels 3–5. What is most striking about Figure 6, however, is the male–female gap in employment rates in the less-educated group, particularly when contrasted with the analogous gap in the other groups. In 2019, the employment rate was 20 percentage points lower for women with less than a high school diploma than for men in the same education group. Figure 6 also reveals that the post-COVID recovery in employment rates was slowest for women with lower levels of education.

Figure 7. Unemployment rate by duration of unemployment over time

12%

10%

8%

6%

4%

2%

0%
 Short-term  Long-term

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59. Unemployment rate is calculated as the fraction of labour force aged 25–59, split between short-term (less than 1 year) and long-term (1 year or longer) duration of unemployment.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1976–2022.


Figure 7, which shows the short- and long-run employment rates between 1976 and 2022, demonstrates how severe and persistent the 1980 and 1990 recessions were. Compared to an average of 6.4% across this period, total unemployment remains above 9% for the three years spanning 1982–84 and reaches nearly 10% at the peak of the 1990s recession. As short-run unemployment began to recover after 1992, the stock of long-run unemployment continued to increase, remaining at more than 3% in 1993 and 1994. The Great Recession, in contrast, was much milder in large part because there were no bank failures in Canada and because high commodity prices generated labour demand in the resource sector that spilled over into other sectors of the economy. Finally, Figure 7 shows the large spike in unemployment in 2020 that results in a larger than average long-term unemployment in 2021, but by 2022 overall unemployment is at its lowest point in the period shown in the figure.

4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)
In the Canadian Labour Force Survey wage data were first collected in 1997; consequently, all of our figures reporting wages cover the period 1997–2022. In this period, the broad changes over time in median real hourly wages are similar for men and women, as seen in Figure 8. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, real wages were flat, though inflation was low and stable during this

period. Beginning in the mid-2000s (and earlier for women), median wages grew steadily, even through the 2008 recession. Much of the rising wages in the 2000s and the first half of the 2010s can be attributed to the resource boom that apparently ‘lifted all boats’. The large spike in 2020 was due to a large change in the composition of the workforce during the COVID shock together with a corresponding dip in employment levels. Specifically, lower-wage workers – who were less able to work from home – were less likely to be employed in 2020, raising the median wage. The sharp decline after 2020 reflects both the return to a more typical workforce composition and the higher than usual inflation rates. Inflation was below 1% in 2020 and reached 6.8% in 2022.


Figure 8. Median real hourly wage among employees, overall and by sex, over time
Male	Female	All

30

28

26

24

22

20


Year

Note: Sample is employees aged 25–59.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1997–2022.



When we disaggregate by education levels in Figure 9, it becomes apparent that real wages were falling in the late 1990s for less educated men and women and this was a period when the weighted average of real minimum wages was also falling. On the whole, however, comparing the trends in Figures 8 and 9 reveals that differences in median wages between men and women and between employees with different levels of education are substantially larger than any changes over time during this period. As was also the case with employment, lower levels of education are associated with much lower median wages for women than for men. Education premiums are much lower for men in Canada because wages are quite high for men with lower levels of education. Indeed, in Figure 9, the median wages for men with less than a high school diploma (ISCED 0–2) essentially overlap with the median wages for women who have completed high school or a shorter post-secondary credential (ISCED 3–5).
Figure 9. Median real hourly wage among employees, by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0–2	Male: ISCED 3–5	Male: ISCED 6–8
Female: ISCED 0–2	Female: ISCED 3–5	Female: ISCED 6–8
40

35

30

25

20

15

10


Year

Note: Sample is employees aged 25–59.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1997–2022.
In Figure 10, we show how median wages grow over the lifecycle separately by sex and education levels. We report these profiles for two different cross-sections pooling five years in each to increase the sample sizes. In the top panel, we show profiles for 1997-2001 (a period where wages were relatively low and stagnant) and in the bottom panel for 2015-2010 (a period where wages were higher and growing). In both cross-sections, there is relatively little life-cycle wage growth for the less-educated group, particularly for women. Mean wages among women in the ISCED 3–5 group grow more over the lifecycle than less educated women but grow substantially less than similarly educated men. Wage growth is much steeper for both men and women with at least one university degree (ISCED 6–8). Some of this steepness, however, can be attributed to compositional changes in the late 20s. Individuals pursuing graduate or professional degrees will not have completed their education by age 25 and may be missing from the sample in these first ages. Because these workers would have higher wages than those with only an undergraduate degree, when they join the sample at later ages that exaggerates the slope.

Figure 10. Median real hourly wage among employees over lifecycle, by sex and education

Male	Female
1997 to 2001
ISCED 0–2	ISCED 3–5	ISCED 6–8
45	45	45

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Age

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Age

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Age





ISCED 0–2
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

2015 to 2019

ISCED 3–5	ISCED 6–8
45	45
40	40
35	35
30	30
25	25
20	20
15	15
10	10
5	5
0	0


Age	Age	Age
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–59. Ages are grouped in 5-year bins, and the youngest age in the bin is labelled on the horizontal axis.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1997–2019.
We turn to a number of measures of wage inequality in the next two figures. In Figure 11, we report the Gini coefficient for men and women separately and pooled together. Overall, wage inequality was growing until roughly 2007; however, over this decade the Gini coefficient increased by only 1 percentage point. The coefficient for women closely tracks the pooled measure. Wage inequality among men was almost 1 point lower in the late 1990s, but inequality grew steadily until it was roughly equal with the Gini among women in the mid-2010s. Beginning in 2016, inequality fell by 2 points within 4 years. This fall coincides with rising minimum wages. As noted in Section 2, the real minimum wage has been rising since its low point in 2003, with the most dramatic increases occurring since 2017. A noteworthy feature of Figure 11 is that the decline in wage inequality in recent years has been more pronounced for women – who are more likely to be working in minimum-wage jobs – than for men.




Figure 11. Gini coefficient of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time
All	Male	Female
0.26


0.25


0.24


0.23


0.22


Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–59.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1997–2022.
Figure 12. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time
All: 90:10 ratio	Male: 90:10 ratio	Female: 90:10 ratio
All: 50:10 ratio	Male: 50:10 ratio	Female: 50:10 ratio

3.8	2.5
3.6
3.4
3.2


3.0
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2

2.0






1.5



Year

Note: Sample is employees aged 25–59.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1997–2022.

The Gini coefficient is most sensitive to differences in the middle of distributions, so in Figure 12 we show the ratio of the 90th to the 10th percentile and the 50th to the 10th percentile, which can better reveal movements in the tails of distributions. The 50:10 ratio is relatively flat for the period between 1997 and 2016, while the 90:10 ratio is increasing. This suggests that the increasing Gini coefficient was driven by growth in wages at the top of the distribution. After 2016, both ratios fall steeply; again, this is likely driven by substantial increases in minimum wages in large provinces that increase wages at the 10th percentile but do not spill over into median wages.
Figure 13 directly shows wage growth, for men and women, at each percentile for selected time periods. The effect of minimum wages is most evident in the bottom right-hand panel, which shows wage growth between 2015 and 2019. Growth at the bottom of the distribution is much larger in percentage terms for women, who are more likely to be employed in minimum-wage work. The top right-hand panel shows changes in wage growth from 2000 to 2007, while the bottom left shows wage growth in the post-Great Recession years from 2008 and 2014. In both of these periods, for men growth is stronger at the top of the distribution, though, particularly between 2008 and 2014, growth in the middle is nearly as strong as at the 90th percentile. This is likely due in large part to the resource boom. Commodity prices were at their highest during this period. In contrast, during the 2000s women’s wages show some polarisation.
Figure 13. Annualised growth in hourly wages among employees by wage percentile, overall and by sex, selected periods

20	Male	Female

15

20	Male	Female

15


10	10

5	5


0

-5


20

15

10

5

0

-5




Percentile

Male	Female











Percentile

0

-5


20

15

10

5

0

-5




Percentile

Male	Female











Percentile




Note: Sample is employees aged 25–59.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1997–2019.


4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)
In this section, we show broad trends in hours worked among employees. Average hours among men are falling gradually between 1976 and 2022, while average hours are rising for women; this is shown in Figure 14. Because the share of employees who are women is growing overtime, overall average hours are initially falling but are quite stable after 2000. In Figure 15, when we disaggregate by education level, the same general patterns are evident. It is notable in this figure that men who have less than a high school diploma work more hours, on average, than men with higher levels of education; whereas among women, the less-educated group have the lowest average hours. Finally, in Figure 16 we show changes in hours worked by wage ventile for the decade between 1998 and 2008 in the top panel and between 2008 and 2018 in the bottom panel. This figure reveals that the declines in hours for men are concentrated among lower-wage employees. For women, changes occur at all wage levels in the later decade and are somewhat more likely at the bottom of the distribution for the earlier decade.
Figure 14. Mean hours worked among employees, overall and by sex, over time
Male	Female	All
43
42
41
40
39
38
37
36
35
34
33


Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–59. Hours are total usual hours at all jobs. Hours worked prior to 1997 may include overtime if that overtime was usual for the typical week. After 1997, the usual hours worked include only the ‘normal’ or ‘contract’ hours and do not include overtime.

Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1976–2022.

Figure 15. Mean hours worked among employees, by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0–2	Male: ISCED 3–5	Male: ISCED 6–8
Female: ISCED 0–2	Female: ISCED 3–5	Female: ISCED 6–8

42

40

38

36

34

32


Year

Note: Sample is employees aged 25–59. Hours are total usual hours at all jobs. Hours worked prior to 1997 may include overtime if that overtime was usual for the typical week. After 1997, the usual hours worked include only the ‘normal’ or ‘contract’ hours and do not include overtime.

Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1990–2022.

Figure 16. Annualised growth in mean hours worked among employees by hourly wage ventile, overall and by sex, selected years
Male	Female

5.0

3.0

1.0

-1.0

-3.0

-5.0



Male	Female
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
-1.0
-2.0
-3.0
-4.0
-5.0
-6.0



Note: Sample is employees aged 25–59. Hours are total usual hours at all jobs. We average mean hourly wage for each year across the three years to obtain hourly wage for each 3-year period.

Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1997–2019.


4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self-employed)
We now investigate how levels of earnings and measures of earnings inequality have evolved over time. Because of a major change in how income data were collected in the Canadian Census in 2006, we are frequently constrained in the number of years we can report in the figures. When possible, we draw on aggregate data from Statistics Canada. More information on these issues can be found in the Data Appendix.
Figure 17. Median real gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time
Male	Female	All
70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0


Year

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–54.

Source: Statistics Canada. Table 11-10-0239-01: Income of individuals by age group, sex and income source, Canada, provinces and selected census metropolitan areas.

We begin with median gross earnings, reported in Figure 17 from 1976 to 2020. While women’s earnings have been growing steadily at the median, men’s earnings were seemingly affected by the two deep recessions beginning in the 1980s and 1990s. There is also a substantial gap when comparing median earnings for men and women. The gap narrows in the 1970s and 1980s but then remains fairly consistently around $18,000 in the 1990s and 2000s. After 2000, another period of narrowing begins, and by 2019 the gap is around $15,000 or 27% of men’s median earnings.
In Figure 18, we stratify by education and sex, but are only able to report median earnings for three years: 2005, 2010 and 2015. This figure further demonstrates one of the most robust characteristics of Canadian labour markets: less-educated men fare relatively well, particularly in comparison to similarly educated women. Indeed, in all three years among men without a high school diploma median earnings are higher than among women who have achieved ISCED levels 3–5.
Figure 18. Median real gross individual earnings, by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0–2	Male: ISCED 3–5	Male: ISCED 6–8
Female: ISCED 0–2	Female: ISCED 3–5	Female: ISCED 6–8
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


Year

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–59.

Source: Authors’ calculations using the Canadian Census for 2006, 2016, and the 2011 National Household Survey.

In order to report a longer time series, we use aggregate data reported by Statistics Canada for Figure 19. Gini coefficients for earnings were not available, so instead we show the overall Gini coefficient for adjusted market income, and we extrapolate for men and women. This is further described in the Data Appendix. We do not observe employer costs in the data set we use, and as such are unable to report the Gini coefficient of total employer cost, over time. The economic downturns occurring in the 1980s and 1990s resulted in permanent increases in market income inequality, as depicted in Figure 19. From 1981 to 1983, there was a spike in the Gini coefficient, which then gradually decreased during the subsequent economic upturn. However, by 1989, the Gini coefficient had still not reverted to its level before the recession. This trend of increasing inequality was even more evident in the 1990s. The Gini coefficient climbed from 1990 to 1992 and kept rising during the recovery phase. From the late 1990s onwards, it remained relatively unchanged.



Figure 19. Gini coefficient of adjusted market income, overall and by sex, over time

All: Gini	Male: Gini	Female: Gini
0.50

0.45

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15


Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 15 to 16 and over. See Data Appendix for explanation of sample.

Source: The Gini coefficient for all is taken from Statistics Canada, Table 11-10-0134-01: Gini coefficients of adjusted market, total and after-tax income. Adjusted market income is plotted. Household market income is adjusted by dividing by the square root of the number of individuals in the household. Market income includes earnings from employment and net self-employment, net investment income, and private retirement income. To impute the Gini coefficient for men and women, the Gini coefficient from Table 11-10-0134-01 is multiplied by the ratios of male to overall and female to overall Gini coefficients, which were estimated using individual gross earnings in the Canadian Census for 2006 and 2016, and the 2011 National Household Survey. Data are representative of individuals in Canada.

Figure 20. 90:20 and 50:20 ratios of adjusted market income, overall and by sex, over time
All: 90:20 ratio	Male: 90:20 ratio	Female: 90:20 ratio
All: 50:20 ratio	Male: 50:20 ratio	Female: 50:20 ratio

7.0	4.0


6.0

5.0



3.0



4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0


2.0


1.0


0.0	0.0


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 15 to 16 and over. See Data Appendix for explanation of sample.

Source: The 90:20 and 50:20 ratios for all are taken from Statistics Canada, Table 11-10-0193-01: Upper income limit, income share and average of adjusted market, total and after-tax income by income decile. The 20th decile is used because the 10th decile is not reported with sufficient data quality. Ratios for adjusted market income are plotted.
Household market income is adjusted by dividing by the square root of the number of individuals in the household. Market income includes earnings from employment and net self-employment, net investment income, and private retirement income. To impute the ratios for men and women, the 90th, 50th, and 20th percentiles of market income from Table 11-10- 0193-01 are multiplied by the ratios of male to overall and female to overall market-income percentiles, which were estimated using individual gross earnings in the Canadian Census for 2006 and 2016, and the 2011 National Household Survey. The ratios are then calculated using the imputed percentiles for men and women. Data are representative of individuals in Canada.

The quantile ratios that are plotted in Figure 20 give an indication of whether inequality is changing most at the top or bottom of the market income distribution. We report the 90:20 and 50:20 ratios because the quality of the estimated 10th percentile was too low. Figure 20 shows the same pattern that inequality ratchets up with the 1980 and 1990 recessions, driven by declining market income at the bottom of the distribution. The 50:20 market income ratio does not rise as quickly as the 90:20 ratio because median market income is also falling in both recessions, though the median decline is proportionately smaller than the decline at the 20th percentile. By contrast with Figure 19, which showed that the Gini coefficient remained consistently high following the 1990 recession, Figure 20 shows some reductions in both the 90:20 and 50:20 ratios following 2000. Again, the resource boom is likely playing a role in these post-2000 trends raising market incomes at the bottom of the distribution. These broad patterns are even more evident in Figure 21 which plots marketing income growth by decile. From 1980 to 1994, the recessionary period, market incomes are falling for all but the highest incomes and the greatest declines in market income occur at the lowest incomes. In the period following the 1990 recession recovery, market incomes were increasing, and increasing the most for the bottom 40%. We are not able to show growth in employer costs, by earnings percentile.



Figure 21. Growth in real adjusted market income by earnings percentile, selected periods
70

0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50












Market income decile

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Market income decile




Note: Sample is individuals aged 15 to 16 and over. See Data Appendix for explanation of sample.
Source: Statistics Canada, Table 11-10-0193-01: Upper income limit, income share and average of adjusted market, total and after-tax income by income decile. Growth in adjusted market income is plotted. Household market income is adjusted by dividing by the square root of the number of individuals in the household. Market income includes earnings from employment and net self-employment, net investment income, and private retirement income.



4.2 Self-employment
In this section, we report the shares of self-employment, by type in Figure 22, by sex and education in Figure 23, and by earnings percentile in Figure 24. As shown in Figure 22, the share of workers who are employees is fairly constant between 1976 and 2019, while there is a shift in the composition of self-employed workers. Over the 1990s, the share of solo self-employed workers rose (while other forms of self-employment fell) and remained relatively flat in the next two decades. Figure 23 further reveals that, between 1990 and 2020, men at all education levels are more likely to be self-employed than women. In the 1990s, self-employment was more common among women in the ISCED 0–2 groups, but this difference disappeared in the mid- 2000s as self-employment rates for less-educated women fell in the first half of that decade.
After 2010, for men, the rate of self-employment is highest in the ISCED 0–2 group, primarily because self-employment falls beginning in 2000 among men with higher levels of education.
Figure 22. Share of employees and self-employed workers, over time

Employees	Solo self-employed	Other self-employed
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%


Year



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59. ‘Solo self-employed’ are self-employed without employees, ‘other self-employed’ include self-employed with employees and family workers.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1976–2022.



Figure 23. Share self-employed by sex and education, over time
Male ISCED 0–2	Male ISCED 3–5	Male ISCED 6–8	Male All

Female ISCED 0–2	Female ISCED 3–5	Female ISCED 6–8	Female All
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1990–2022.



Figure 24. Share self-employed by percentile of individual earnings, selected years
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1  4  8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72 76 80 84 88 92 96100
2005	2010	2015




Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59. Workers are defined as self-employed if they receive more income from self- employment than they do from employment.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the Canadian Census for 2006, 2016, and the 2011 National Household Survey. Data are representative of individuals in Canada.

5. Institutions
This section looks at labour market institutions that affect earnings and incomes: minimum wages and collective bargaining, self-employment, and social insurance. As in most of the report, all analysis is restricted to workers aged 25–59.

5.1 Minimum wage and unions
Figure 25. Bite of the minimum wage over time

25%	0.6



20%

0.5




15%


10%


5%


0%

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0



Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–59. The figure presents the share of workers with a wage less than 1.2 times the minimum wage (yellow line, left-hand-side scale). The green line represents the ratio of the minimum wage to the median wage. Minimum wages are set at the provincial level for most industries. We use the average minimum wage weighted by the share of employment in each province.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1997–2021.
Figure 25, which reports two measures of how much minimum wages ‘bite’, reveals the movements in minimum wages that are driving many of the changes at the bottom of the wage distributions reported in Section 4. The yellow line, reporting the share of employees earning less than 1.2 times the minimum wage, and the green line, reporting the ratio of the minimum to median wages, follow the same general trends. Median wages are growing slowly before 2018, such that most of the movements depicted in Figure 25 are driven by changes in real minimum wages. After 2015, several large provinces introduced substantial increases in pursuit of a $15 minimum wage and this is reflected in the spike at 2018 in both measures. The sharp decline in 2020 is likely the result of compositional changes in employment and particularly low inflation associated with the economic shutdowns during the COVID-19 pandemic.




Figure 26. Union density and fraction of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements, over time

Union density	Collective contract coverage rate

35%
34%
33%
32%
31%
30%
29%
28%
27%
26%
25%


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1998–2022.

Figure 26 shows the steady decline in the share of workers covered by unions or collective contracts; this is a continuation of a trend that began in the 1980s, and which is discussed further below. More recent fluctuations in unionisation rates are likely driven by changes in the workforce associated with the pandemic.




5.2 Role of direct taxes and benefits (financial transfers from the state)
In this section we report the magnitudes of financial transfers to and from the state by quartiles of the net household income distribution. The data source is the recently introduced Canadian Income Survey, so our analysis is limited to the time period 2012–19.
Figure 27 shows benefits received from the state by net household income quartiles. Benefits display a high degree of progressivity that is fairly stable over this time period. The lowest quartile receive government benefits of the order of 29–34% of household income, while for the second quartile these benefits range from 10% to 13% of net household income, for the third quartile 5%, and for the top quartile 2–3%.
Figure 28 focuses on direct income taxes and social security contributions as a proportion of gross income by net household income quartile. Again, substantial progressivity is evident, with the bottom quartile contributing 6–8% to taxes and social security contributions, versus 23–34% for the top quartile. The second and third quartiles contribute approximately 15% and 18–19%,

respectively. Apart from a slight increase in direct income taxes paid by the bottom three quartiles since 2017, there is no evident trend over this period.

Figure 27. Benefits as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile

    Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile 40.0%
35.0%
30.0%
25.0%
20.0%
15.0%
10.0%
5.0%
0.0%
2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017	2018	2019
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

Source: Authors’ calculations using Canadian Income Survey 2012–19.



Figure 28. Direct income taxes and social security contributions as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile
.

    Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile 30.0%
25.0%

20.0%

15.0%

10.0%

5.0%

0.0%
2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017	2018	2019
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

Source: Authors’ calculations using Canadian Income Survey 2012–19.

A succinct way of illustrating the combined effect of the impacts of benefits received (Figure 27) and taxes paid (Figure 28) is to express net income as a proportion of total income, as is done in Figure 29. The bottom quartile keep over 85% of their gross income versus about 78% for the third quartile, 75% for the second quartile and approximately 71–73% for the top quartile. We do not observe employer contributions to social security and thus cannot report the ratio of disposable income to gross income and employee and employer social security contributions.



Figure 29. Net income as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile
    Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile 90.0%
85.0%

80.0%

75.0%

70.0%

65.0%

60.0%
2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017	2018	2019
Year

6. Household incomes
This section looks at trends in household incomes. We start by looking at trends in household composition and the degree of assortative matching, which influence household earnings. We then compare trends in household earnings and household disposable income for working households, drawing out the role of the tax and transfer system over time. Finally, we show a set of charts on trends in household income inequality across all households (including those where no one is in work).

6.1 Trends in household composition
Two features of the time series behaviour of the share of adults married or cohabiting are evident in Figure 30. First, for the overall adult population age 25–59 the share married/cohabiting declines steadily over this period from 76% in 1990 to 65% in 2022. Second, there are large differences by educational attainment in the trends over time, with the share married/cohabiting falling dramatically for the least educated – from 76.3% (the highest of any educational group) in 1990 to 57% in 2022 (by far the lowest of any educational group), whereas the share remains fairly stable over time in the 72–73% range for the most highly educated group. The middle educational group displays declining shares married/cohabiting from about 76% in 1990 to 66% to 68% in 2022.
Of course, the composition of these groups has been changing over time. With rising educational attainment the least educated group has become a smaller fraction (and probably a more select subset) of the overall population and the group with the highest educational attainment has grown in size relative to the adult population. Another factor that may affect the interpretation of these trends is that the age at first marriage has been rising over time.

Figure 30. Share married/cohabiting, overall and by education, over time


ISCED 0–2	ISCED 3–5	ISCED 6–8	All
80

75

70

65

60

55

50


Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59.

Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1990–2022.

Figure 31 adds the share with a working partner to the mix and reports both share married/cohabiting and share with a working partner by gender at different percentiles of the gross earnings distribution for three years: 1994 (females only), 2005 (both genders) and 2015 (males only). Both working and non-working individuals are shown on each graph. Shares married/cohabiting exceed those with a working partner throughout the earnings distribution in all three years. The gap between the two is larger for males and widens at the upper end of the earnings distribution. Shares married/cohabiting rise with earnings for males in 2005 and 2015 but those for females are relatively flat, especially in 2005. The gap between those married/cohabiting and those with a working partner is also evident for non-workers and wider for male than female non-workers.

Figure 31. Share married/cohabiting and share with working partner, by sex and individual gross earnings percentile, selected years
Working: Married/cohabiting	Working: Has a working partner
 Non-working: Married/cohabiting	 Non-working: Has a working partner


100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%










2005, Females



14 24 34 44 54 64 74 84 94
14 24 34 44 54 64 74 84 94	Female gross earnings
Male gross earnings percentile	percentile



90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%








2015,Females


14 24 34 44 54 64 74 84 94
14  24 34 44 54 64 74 84 94	Female gross earnings
Male gross earnings percentile	percentile





Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–54. Married/cohabitating also includes civil partnerships. The proportion with a working partner is conditional on being married/cohabiting.

Source: Authors’ calculations using 2006 and 2016 Canadian Census Hierarchical Files.



Figure 32 shows the relationship between an individual’s gross earnings percentile and the earnings percentile of their partner or spouse by gender for the years 2005 and 2015. Several striking features are evident. For both males and females the relationship is strongly upward sloping and these strong relationships are almost identical in both 2005 and 2015. Both figures imply a strong degree of assortative matching in terms of earnings. For males, the relationship between the percentile of their earnings and that of their partner is approximately linear, while for females the relationship is upward sloping and convex, indicating a stronger relationship at the margin at higher percentiles of the female’s earnings percentile. Among non-working women their partner’s earnings are at the median of the male earnings distribution, while for non- working men their partner’s earnings are a bit below the median of the female earnings distribution. These relationships for non-working partners are very similar in both 2005 and 2015.

Figure 32. Mean gross earnings percentile of partner/spouse by individual’s gross earnings percentile, selected years

2005	2015	 Non-working: 2005	 Non-working: 2015



75	70
70	65
65	60
60	55
55
50
50
45	45
40	40
35	35
30	30

Female gross earnings percentile



Male gross earnings percentile


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–54 (with strictly positive earnings for defining earnings percentiles). Married/cohabitating also includes civil partnerships.

Source: Authors’ calculations using 2006 and 2016 Canadian Census Hierarchical Files.






Figures 33 and 34 show the shares of individuals by position in the household in 2006, 2011, and 2016, first for all households (Figure 33) and then by gender and education (Figure 34). Some moderate growth is evident in the proportion of single, no-children households with an accompanying modest decline in couples with children (Figure 33). There is also some growth in the share of households with an adult child. Growing proportions of households headed by singles, with and without children, are also reported in Figure 34, trends that are most evident for males and females with low and medium levels of education. Shares of individuals by position in the household are relatively stable for the high-education group compared to the other two education groups.

Figure 33. Share of individuals by position in the household, over time
 Single, no children	 Single, children	 Couple, no children
   Couple, children	 Adult child	 Other 100%
90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–54

Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011 National Household Survey, and the 2006 and 2016 Canadian Census Hierarchical Files.



Figure 34. Share of individuals by position in the household, by sex and education, over time
 Single, no children	 Single, children	 Couple, no children
    Couple, children	 Adult child	 Other 100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%



100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Year	Year






100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Year	Year




Year	Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–54

Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011 National Household Survey, and the 2006 and 2016 Canadian Census Hierarchical Files.




6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households
This section focuses on the earnings and incomes of working households. To begin, Figure 35 reports the share of individuals in a working household for the years 2005, 2010, and 2015, overall and by educational attainment. Overall, over 90% of individuals live in a working household, a proportion that is stable over this time period. The share of less-educated individuals who live in working households is more than 5 percentage points lower than in the other two groups with higher levels of education. For all three education groups, the shares in working households dipped in 2010; however, this could be because the 2011 Census was collected differently. More information on the differences is included in the Data Appendix.
Between 2005 and 2015, there were slight increases in the share of high- and medium-educated individuals living in working households, while the same share fell slightly for the less-educated group.
Figure 35. Share of individuals in a working household, overall and by education, over time
ISCED 0–2	ISCED 3–5	ISCED 6–8	All
100%
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%
70%
65%
60%


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–54. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work.

Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011 National Household Survey, and the 2006 and 2016 Canadian Census Hierarchical Files.


Figure 36 compares median real household incomes of working and non-working households over the same three years 2005, 2010, and 2015, while also showing gross household earnings for working households. For working households, disposable household income and gross earnings have grown over the period. Disposable real household income of non-working families is substantially lower (less than one-quarter in size) but median income has grown from $10,300 in 2005 to $13,000 in 2015.
Figure 37 further investigates the evolution of real household earnings of working households by plotting annualised growth rates of gross and disposable household incomes by percentiles of the earnings distribution over the 2005–10 and 2010–15 periods. In the earlier 2005–10 period,



both household earnings and income growth were stronger below the 40th percentile, with growth increasing at lower percentiles. At all percentiles above the 40th, growth is roughly the same. Moreover, between 2005 and 2010, the growth rates for disposable income are higher than those for gross household earnings at all percentiles. Relative to the earlier period, there is much less growth between 2010 and 2015 for earnings and incomes along the whole distribution. There are modest signs of increasing inequality as growth rates are somewhat positively correlated with percentiles.
Figure 36. Median real gross household earnings and disposable household income among working households, over time
Gross household earnings (working HHs) Disposable household income (working HHs) Disposable household income (non-working HHs) Disposable household income (all HHs)
60

50

40

30

20

10

0


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–54. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. For median gross household earnings we have restricted the sample to those with strictly positive household earnings. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011 National Household Survey, and the 2006 and 2016 Canadian Census Hierarchical Files.
Figure 37. Annualised growth in real gross household earnings and household disposable income for working households, by percentile, selected years


15	15

10	10

5	5

0	0

-5	-5


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–54 in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. For the household earnings series we have restricted the sample to those with strictly positive earnings. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011 National Household Survey, and the 2006 and 2016 Canadian Census’, Hierarchical Files.

6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households
This section examines trends in income inequality for all households over the 2005–15 period, beginning in Figure 38 with differences in levels and growth of real disposable income overall and by education. Differences in real disposable income across the three education groups are large in 2005 – for example, the income of the highest education category are more than 70% greater than the lowest education group – and widen further over this 10-year period, especially between 2010 and 2015. By 2015 disposable income of the highly educated group is 1.8 times that of the low-educated group.



Figure 38. Median real disposable household income for all households, overall and by education, over time
ISCED 0–2	ISCED 3–5	ISCED 6–8	All
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–54. Incomes are in 2019 prices. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.



Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011 National Household Survey, and the 2006 and 2016 Canadian Census Hierarchical Files.


Although the gap in median incomes between the most and least educated has been widening, in Figure 39 we show that inequality, as measured by Gini coefficients, has been constant over this period, whether we winsorise at zero and the 99th percentile or not. The top 1% share also shows little change during this 10-year period, declining by one percentage point in the first 5 years and then rising again in the latter 5 years. Relative poverty also rising slightly between 2005 and 2010, but declines overall from 21% to 20% between 2005 and 2015.
To further characterise inequality trends during this period, we plot quantile ratios for real disposable household income in Figure 40. Between 2005 and 2015, the 90:10 ratio falls slightly from 4.9 to 4.5, which is driven by changes in the bottom decile relative to the median. The 50:10 ratio falls from 2.6 to 2.4, while the 90:50 ratio is flat at 1.9.


Figure 39. Gini, relative poverty and top 1% share of net household income for all households, over time

Gini	Winsorised Gini	Relative poverty	Top 1% share (right axis)
0.35	0.1
0.33	0.09
0.31	0.08
0.29	0.07
0.27	0.06
0.25	0.05
0.23	0.04
0.21	0.03
0.19	0.02
0.17	0.01
0.15	0
2005	2010	2015
Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–54. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with less than 60% of contemporaneous median income. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011 National Household Survey, and the 2006 and 2016 Canadian Census Hierarchical Files.

Figure 40. Percentile ratios of disposable household incomes for all households, over time
90:10 ratio	90:50 ratio	50:10 ratio
6

5

4

3

2

1


Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–54.

Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011 National Household Survey, and the 2006 and 2016 Canadian Census’, Hierarchical Files.

7. Immigration
This section provides some information on the extent of immigration in Canada’s labour market since 2006 and some key labour market outcomes. Figure 41 shows that the share of immigrants in the adult population grew from 22% in 2006 to 30% in 2022. In a few years the share of immigrants grew by 1% or more (e.g., 2015–16 and 2020–21). Only during the COVID year 2021–22 did the rise in population from immigration match that from natural population increase.
Figure 42 shows that immigrants are fairly evenly distributed in the distribution of disposable income in recent years. Figure 43 compares immigrants to the native born on several labour market outcomes. Immigrants are much more highly educated than their native born counterparts, especially males (who are often the principal applicant in the immigrant selection system, which places considerable weight on educational attainment). Measures of immigrant work activity are similar to those of natives: employment rates of males match those of natives, and immigrant females’ employment rates are 80% of their native counterparts. Hours worked by immigrant men and women match those of natives. Despite their higher (measured) education levels and similar levels of work activity, earnings of immigrant men and women are 80% of their native-born counterparts. Several studies conclude that the main reason is discounting of immigrants’ work experience in their country of origin, though there is also some discounting of foreign education. Finally, although gross household incomes of immigrant families are 20% lower than those of natives, disposable household incomes are equal. This may reflect immigrants’ greater use of social programmes, which some recent studies have found.

Figure 41. Share of immigrants in the population 25–54 years of age, 2006–22
35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–54. A migrant is defined as someone who was born outside of Canada.
Source: Statistics Canada, Table 14-10-0089-01: Labour force characteristics of immigrants by country of birth, annual. Estimates drawn from the Labour Force Survey.

Figure 42. Share of immigrants in each disposable income ventile for 2012 and 2019
2012	2019

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%



1	2	4	6	8	10	12	14	16	18	20
Ventile



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–59. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

Source: Authors’ calculations using Canadian Income Survey 2012, 2019.



Figure 43. Outcomes for immigrants relative to Canadian born, ages 25–54

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–54. A migrant is defined as someone who was born outside Canada. Household incomes and earnings have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.



Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November 2019 LFS for education, employment and hours outcomes, 2016 Canadian Census for earnings, and 2016 Canadian Census Hierarchical File for incomes.

8. References
Banting, K., 2012. Debating employment insurance. In K. Banting and J. Medow (eds), Making EI Work (pp. 1–34). Kingston, Ontario: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Foley, K., Green, D. A. and Riddell, W. C., forthcoming. Canadian inequality over the last 40 years: Common and contrary variations on universal themes. Fiscal Studies.
Green, D. A., Morissette, R., Sand, B. M. and Snoddy, I., 2019. Economy-wide spillovers from booms: Long-distance commuting and the spread of wage effects. Journal of Labor Economics, 37(S2), S643—87.
Kuhn, P. J. and Riddell, C., 2010. The long-term effects of unemployment insurance: Evidence from New Brunswick and Maine, 1940–1991. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 63, 183–204.
Van Audenrode, M., Fournier, A. A., Havet, N. and Royer, J., 2005. Employment insurance in Canada and international comparisons. Report prepared for Human Resources and Skills Development Canada. Groupe d’Analyse, October.
Veall, M. R., 2010. 2B or Not 2B? What should have happened with the Canadian long form census? What should happen now? Canadian Public Policy/Analyse de politiques, 36(3), 395–9.

9. Data appendix
Surveys used
We draw on three primary sources of data: the Labour Force Survey, the Census of Population, and the Canadian Income Survey. Additionally, when longer time series are available, we rely on aggregate series constructed by Statistics Canada.

The Labour Force Survey (LFS) in Canada is a 6-month rotating panel; however, in the public use microdata files (PUMF) we do not observe the panel linkages. Individuals who do not switch employers are asked the wage questions only in the first month they enter the survey. This means that although we would observe wage changes for individuals changing jobs, we do not observe wage changes for those who remain in the same job. To avoid this, we use data from two months that are more than 6 months apart, guaranteeing that all sample members appear in the data only once. We choose May and November because these are the least seasonal months. The wage and employment series that we calculate using the PUMF are nearly identical to the analogous aggregate series published on Statistics Canada’s website. Data from the LFS are representative of individuals in Canada, excluding those who are employed in the military full- time, who live on First Nations reserves, and who live in the Territories.

We use the LFS whenever possible; however, the LFS notably does not contain annual earnings or income data. We have LFS data from 1976 to 2022. Because of the way education data were collected when the LFS changed in 1990, all series that include education begin in 1990. Wage data begin in 1997.

We also draw on the Canadian Census of Population (the Census). The Censuses are undertaken in May, every 5 years. The most recent Census for which public use data are available is the 2016 Census. All income and earnings data are collected as totals for the year prior. For example, the income data in the 2016 Census cover 2015.

There was an important break in the way that data were collected between the 2001 and 2006 Censuses. Beginning in 2006, individuals were asked whether they would grant Statistics Canada permission to obtain income directly from Canada Revenue Agency (CRA), the Canadian tax authority. For consistency with CRA income definitions, some components of income were changed. Taxable allowances and benefits, as well as research grants and royalties, were included as wages and salaries for the first time in 2006. An additional significant change occurred in 2011 when the mandatory Census long form (which provides detailed information, including earnings and labour market information, on 20% of the population) was replaced by the voluntary Canadian Household Survey, which subsequent research concluded was not representative of the population (Veall, 2010).

Because of the change in the data collection and definitions beginning in 2006, we only combine the 2006, 2011, and 2016 Censuses. We use weights that control for observable non-random sampling in the 2011 data. The PUMF we use are subsamples of the full Census. For figures related to household income, we use data from the Hierarchical Files.

Because of the trend break in the earnings data in the Censuses, we use time series published by Statistics Canada whenever possible. These time series combine data from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) from 1976 to 1992, a combination of the SCF and the Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics (SLID) from 1993 to 1997, the SLID from 1998 to 2011 and the Canadian Income Survey (CIS) from 2012 to the present. These time series are based on the population aged 15 and older when SCF data are used and 16 and older when CIS or SLID data are used.

When a Statistics Canada series is available for the population but not separately by gender we impute the values. To impute the 90:50 and 90:10 ratios for men and women, the 90th, 50th, and 10th percentiles of market income from the Statistics Canada series are multiplied by the ratios of male to overall and female to overall market-income percentiles, which were estimated using individual gross earnings in the Canadian Census PUMF for 2006 and 2016, and the 2011 National

Household Survey. The ratios are then calculated using the imputed percentiles for men and women.

In Section 5.3, which focuses on taxes and government transfers, we use data from the Canadian Income Surveys (CIS) 2012 to 2019. The CIS sample is a random sample of respondents to the LFS and includes detailed information about household incomes. The first year that the CIS was fielded is 2012 and the most recent public use data is 2019.

Price index used
We deflate all Canadian dollar values to 2019 prices using the all-items CPI from Statistics Canada – Table 18-10-0005-01: Consumer Price Index, annual average, not seasonally adjusted.

Differences in age groupings
The age categories in the LFS PUMF are organised in five-year groups, and include 55–59, 60–64, 65–69, and 70+. For the main analysis, we use ages 25–59. Rather than include in the sample people older than 74, for the appendices, we use a sample of individuals ages 25–69. The Hierarchical Files for the Canadian Censuses have wider age bins; we use ages 25–54 when drawing on those data. For the figures relying on Statistics Canada aggregates, we are further constrained in the age ranges that are available. The specific age ranges are indicated in the notes to each figure.

Weighting
Throughout, in all graphs using public use microdata from Statistics Canada, we use weights provided by Statistics Canada that account for any stratified sampling or non-response along observed dimensions.

10. Appendix: 25–69 and 25–74 age groups
Figure 44. Growth in hourly wages among employees aged 25–69 by wage percentile, overall and by sex, selected periods

5	Male	Female

3

1

-1

-3

20	Male	Female

15

10

5

0


-5	-5	Percentile



20

15

10

5

0

Male	Female	20

15

10

5

0

Male	Female


-5	Percentile	-5	Percentile



Note: Sample is employees aged 25–69.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1997–2019.

Figure 45. Growth in mean hours worked among employees aged 25–69 by wage percentile, overall and by sex, selected years
Male	Female
15
13
11
9
7
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5





Male	Female
15
13
11
9
7
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5





Note: Sample is employees aged 25–69. We pool data from across the three years to obtain hourly wage for each 3-year period.
Source: Authors’ calculations using May and November LFS for 1997–2019.




Figure 46. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, ages 25–74, over time


Female	Male	All

0.50
0.49
0.48
0.47
0.46
0.45
0.44
0.43
0.42
0.41
0.40


Year

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–74.

Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011 National Household Survey, and the 2006 and 2016 Canadian Censuses.



Figure 47. Growth in gross earnings by earnings percentile, overall and sex, ages 25–74, selected periods


30

20

10

0

-10

-20

Male	Female	20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10

Male	Female




Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–74.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011 National Household Survey, and the 2006 and 2016 Canadian Censuses.

Figure 48. Gini, relative poverty and top 1% share of net household income for all households, ages 25–74, over time
Gini	Poverty share	Top 1% share (right axis)
0.35	0.1
0.33	0.09
0.31	0.08
0.29	0.07
0.27	0.06
0.25	0.05
0.23	0.04
0.21	0.03
0.19	0.02
0.17	0.01
0.15	0
2005	2010	2015
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–74. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with less than 60% of contemporaneous median income. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011 National Household Survey, and the 2006 and 2016 Canadian Census Hierarchical Files.
Figure 49. Gini coefficients for adjusted household income, Canada, 1976–2021
0.5

0.45

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2
1976	1986	1996	2006	2016	2026
Adjusted market income  Adjusted total income  Adjusted after-tax income


Note: Source is Statistics Canada Table 11-10-0134-01: Gini coefficients of adjusted market, total and after-tax income (formerly CANSIM 206-0033). Underlying data are from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) from 1976 to 1992, a combination of the SCF and the Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics (SLID) from 1993 to 1997, the SLID from 1998 to 2011, and the Canadian Income Survey (CIS) beginning in 2012. Sample is individuals aged 15 or older in the SCF and aged 16 older in the SLID and CIS. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.




Figure 50. Annualised growth in real gross household earnings and household disposable income for working households, by percentile, selected years



20	10
5
15	0
-5
10	-10
-15
5	-20
-25
0	-30

-5




Percentile




Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–74 in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. For the household earnings series we have restricted the sample to those with strictly positive earnings. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011 National Household Survey, and the 2006 and 2016 Canadian Census Hierarchical Files.

lnstitute for Fiscal Studies

Country Studies: Inequalities in Europe and North America
A parallel study to the IFS Deaton Review

Antoine Bozio Malka Guillot Lukas Puschnig Maxime Tô

Inequality in France: 1968–2022

Inequality in France: 1968–2022?


Antoine Bozio
Paris School of Economics, EHESS & IPP

Lukas Puschnig
University of Southern California & IPP

Malka Guillot
Université de Liège

Maxime Tô
IPP & IFS

Institut des politiques publiques (IPP) November 22, 2023

    ?This work is supported by the framework of the Trans-Atlantic Platform (http://www.transatlanticplatform.com/) by the French National Research Agency, the United States’ National Science Foundation, the United Kingdom’s Economic and Social Research Council, Canada’s Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, the Academy of Finland and Germany’s Federal Ministry of Education and Research. The French part of this grant, funded by the ANR, is grant number ANR-22-RRRP-0001-01-TACI. This is a parallel project to the IFS Deaton Review, which is funded by the Nuffield Foundation. Co-funding from the Economic Co-funding from the ESRC-funded Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy at IFS (grant number ES/T014334/1) is also gratefully acknowledged.

Contents

Contents
Page
1 Executive summary	3
2 Institutional background	6
3 Notes on measurement and definitions	10
4 Individual employment and earnings	13
4.1 Trends in employment	13
4.2 Trends in hourly wages	19
4.3 Trends in hours worked	25
4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work	28
4.5 Self-employment	32
5 Labour market institutions	35
5.1 Minimum wage and unions	35
5.2 Role of direct taxes and benefits (financial transfers from the state)	37
6 Household incomes	40
6.1 Trends in household composition	40
6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households	45
6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households	48
7 Inequality between migrants and natives	50
References	53
Appendix: additional charts	54


1 Executive summary

Employment, wages, hours and individual earnings

Over the period from the late 1960s to mid-1990s, France has experienced declining employment rates for younger and older workers, as well as for prime working-aged (25–60-year-old) men. After that date a moderate reversal in trend is noticeable for younger and older workers. This contrasts with the sustained rise in employment rates among prime working-aged women over the last four decades, from 46% in 1968 to 78% in 2022 (Figure 1). Over the same period, the employment rate for men decreased from 94% to 83%. Employment rates of younger workers (aged 16–24) decreased from 58% in 1968 to 22% in 1997, which coincides with the large increase in educational attainment (Figure 4). It then increased up to 2002 and has since stabilised around 30% for males and 28% for females. The employment rate for older workers (aged 61–74) also decreased from 1968 to 2000 for both male and females, reaching its lowest level (3.8%) in 2001. From that low point, the employment rate of older workers started to slowly increase. This reversal in trend can largely be explained by the end in the 1990s of early retirement schemes that had been prevalent since the late 1970s, and the introduction of pension reforms (e.g., reforms occurred in 1993, 2004, 2010 and 2013) aiming to increase the retirement age. However, despite this recent increase, the employment rate of older people remains low (15% for men, 13% for women) compared to other countries (e.g., more than 40% in the UK).
   Net wage inequality declined significantly in France during the early period, from 1968 to 1985, then increased slightly from 1985 up to 1994 before declining again (Figure 49). Inequality in hourly wages decreased in the 2000s (Figures 11 and 12): starting from 2.68 in 1999, the 90:10 ratio decreased to 2.40 in 2010 (see also Verdugo 2014). Inequality in gross earnings, as measured from the Gini coefficient, slightly decreased from 1996 to 2017 (Figure 20). Over the same period, the 90:10 ratio of individual earnings inequality also decreased. Decomposition by gender shows that this decrease is mainly driven by a sharp decrease in earnings inequality among women at


the end of the 1990s (Figure 21). While net wage inequality declined in France, the pretax wage (or labour cost) inequality increased from 1985 onwards (Figure 49 and Bozio, Breda & Guillot 2023).
   Finally, when we consider disposable household inequality indicators, we obtain declining inequality in the 1970s, and then a relative stabilization when we look at usual indicators like gini, or 90:10 ratios. Only the top 1 percent share exhibit an increasing trend during the 1985- 2000 period, after a declining period in the 1970s, if one use exploit administrative data (Figure 48).

Labour market institutions

The French minimum wage dates back to 1950. It was dramatically increased in 1968, and during the 1970s and 1980s, to reach 60% of median earnings in 1986 (Figure 27). Starting in the mid- 1990s, in a context of high unemployment, policies aiming to lower the cost of the minimum wage were implemented with reductions in social security contributions (SSCs) targeted around the minimum wage (Kramarz & Philippon 2001). As a result of this policy, the labour cost of the minimum wage started to decrease as a share of the labour cost of median earners (to 45% of median earnings in 2015) while the net minimum wage remained unchanged around 60% of median earnings (Figure 27).
   Union density in France is at a low level compared to other European countries. It was only 20% in the 1970s, and it declined further to 10% by the 1990s. This trend is in stark contrast to the coverage of collective bargaining agreements which has increased progressively to cover now close to 100% of workers (Figure 28).
   France experienced a large decline in the share of self-employed workers during the 1968– 2002 period (Figure 24). This trend was mainly driven by a decrease in the share of solo self- employed, which halved (from 12% to 6%) during the period. Since 2003, there has been a mild rise in self-employment, also driven by the solo self-employed category. Nonetheless, while the change is mainly driven by low-educated males before 2002, after 2003 it comes from middle- and


highly educated women (Figure 25).


Household incomes

Two key factors affect the way in which inequality in individual earnings translates into inequal- ity in household disposable incomes: household structures and the tax and benefit system. In France, household structures have evolved only marginally over the period of study. There has been a decline in the proportion of individuals married or cohabiting, from 80% in 1969 to 70% in 2019. This trend has been more pronounced for low educated individuals so that now individuals with education beyond high school have now a higher probability of being married or cohabiting than the lower educated group. Contrary to other countries like the UK, we do not detect any increase in assortative matching between 1996 and 2019.
   The tax and benefit system has played an important role in counteracting increasing pre-tax inequality in France, but not through the same type of policy tools as in other countries (Bozio 2023). There has been increasing benefits for the lowest income group (figure 29), but most of the redistributive action has taken place through the employer social security schedule. In the early 1980s, the SSC schedule appears relatively regressive with high average rates for income below the mean and then decreasing SSC rates. With a policy of increasing payroll tax rates for incomes above the Social Security threshold, and from the mid-1990s on-wards the introduction of reduction of employer SSCs around the minimum wage level, payroll tax rates have first increased for high skill workers, and then declined for low skill workers. This policy has led to a much more progressive payroll taxation in France. The consequence is that inequality in net earnings have declined or remained stable, even though pre-tax inequality was increasing (Bozio, Breda & Guillot 2023).
   As a result, the measure of inequality in disposable household incomes has declined in France over the period spanning from the late 1960s to the mid-1980s, before stabilising at this level. The P90/P10 ratio drops from 4.8 in 1970 to 3.7 by 1984, and then from 3.7 in 1996 to 3.6 in 2019 (figure 43). The gini coefficient or the relative poverty rate present a similar evolution (figure 42).


2 Institutional background
France has a population of 68 million people in 2023, with a GDP of 2640 billion euros in 2022. Public spending is high at 58.2% of GDP in 2022 (it was 55.4% in 2019 before Covid), and the tax burden amounts to 45.4% of GDP. France is characterised by a very comprehensive welfare state developed originally along a social insurance design, following a Bismarckian model, implying high social security contributions but also benefits in proportion to pas earnings. Although France is a relatively centralised country, the Social Security system, the important role of labour unions and employers’ unions in managing mandatory complementary schemes, and different layers of local authorities (communes, départements, regions) all play a role along side the central state.

Provisions of the welfare state

The French welfare state social protection system can be decomposed into two parts. First, the social security system, financed by contributions from workers and employers, includes insurance against the risks of unemployment, sickness, family and old age. Second, the insurance system is backed up by a solidarity component, composed of means-tested benefits and financed by taxes. While the initial social security system was mostly designed for insurance purposes, universal schemes with a solidarity objective were introduced over the years, to cope with the economic crises starting in the mid-1970s.
   The amount and duration of unemployment insurance benefits depend on the duration of contributions to the scheme and the amount paid in. But unemployment insurance is also char- acterised by a progressive replacement rate. Indeed, while the average replacement rate was 73% in 2021, it ranged from 63% (for higher incomes) to 94% (for lower incomes). The French pen- sion system is a public pay-as-you go system with a generous coverage and high replacement rates. Total pension expenditures are significantly higher than in most European countries, at 14% of GDP. Although the system is composed of many different schemes, it covers earnings up to very high in the earnings distribution (up to P99). The main basic scheme in the private sector


has strong elements of redistribution, but is complemented by a point-based system with strong linkages between contributions and benefits. The pension system is mostly funded through So- cial Security contributions, as only some specific pension benefits like minimum pension and family-related bonuses are funded by general revenues. Health care insurance in France offers an universal coverage, also with two layers, one from the main Social Security scheme, the other from voluntary complementary schemes. The public insurance covers both public hospitals and private practices equally, so the large public coverage of health care does not mean that health care is mostly publicly provided. Initially, healthcare insurance was only funded through social security contributions, but progressively it became funded through tax revenues, notably with the creation in 1991 of the cotisation sociale généralisée, a flat-rate income tax earmarked to Social Security expenditures.
   Complementing the insurance system, there are a variety of benefits that provide social assis- tance. These cash transfer programmes are means-tested, not taxable and not time-limited. The amounts awarded depend on household composition with a large component in relation to the number of kids. The oldest benefit is child-benefit which is universal (i.e., all households with at least two children are eligible): its amount is a lump-sum for each kid, starting with the sec- ond child, higher for low income household, but otherwise not means-tested (i.e., higher income household receive the benefit). There are also child-care benefits which cover child-care costs, with a progressive schedule but still universal in their design with high income household re- ceiving a substantial even if lower benefit. The other main benefit is housing benefit, for renters, which is means-tested at the household income and has some component of geographical vari- ations. As other benefits in France, the family composition matter in defining the amount and higher benefits are available in proportion of the number of children in the household.
   Since 1988, family and housing benefits have been complemented by income support called in French revenu minimum d’insertion, RMI and then later transformed in 2009 into revenu de solidarité active. These means-tested benefits provide last-resort income support for low-income households that are not eligible for other benefits. In 2001, an in-work tax credit is introduced


(prime pour l’emploi), later transformed into an in-work benefit (prime d’activité), to encourage return to work. Individuals who cannot work because of a disability have been able since 1975 to benefit from another type of income support, more generous than the standard social minimum. Depending on their age, individuals may also be eligible for the old-age minimum, created in 1956. This scheme aims to provide support for older individuals who have not made sufficient contributions to the pension system.

Provision of public services

In France, public services are provided at the national level for health care, education, police and justice system, and at a local level for child care, elderly care, social assistance, local public trans- portation, waste management, local police and fire services. The public health services comprised mostly emergency units and public hospitals, but through universal health care insurance, use of health care in the private sector is also covered. Most general practitioners are in a private practice, and many private hospitals contribute to the health care system while being covered in a similar way by the health care insurance. There are out-of-pocket expenses, but those re- main low in international comparison, and even lower after complementary health care insurance coverage.
   Education is largely provided and funded by the state, and is free for all children aged 3–18 (and mandatory up to 16). Private schools (mostly with religious orientation) cater for 20% of pupils in France and also receive public funding to cover for personnel costs, leading to relatively low private school fees. There is no academic selection for entry into secondary school (at age 11), but there is frequently academic selection into the final 3 years of secondary education. Higher- education is generally free and funded by the state. Two tracks are available to students: the first is the standard university track, with little selection into entry apart the high-school degree; the second is an elite track where students prepare for a competitive exam for entry to selective higher-education institutions called grandes écoles. While both tracks are publicly funded, the subsidy-to-students ratio vastly differs between the two tracks, the selective institutions being


much better-off. Regarding the rest of public services, municipalities are also responsible for providing many public services, such as .

Tax system

In 2022, tax revenue in France is second largest after Denmark was among the highest in the European Union, amounting to 45.4% of GDP.
   The French tax structure can be characterised by the large share collected by the social se- curity system (55% of tax revenue). The second main provider of tax revenue is the central state (28% of tax revenue). The tax system is indeed largely centralised, with only 14% collected by local administrations. The three main components of tax revenue come from SSCs (one-third), income tax revenues (one-third) and indirect taxes (one-sixth). The remainder of tax revenue is composed of other production, capital and inheritance taxes.
   There are two components to the system of income taxes. The first is the standard progressive income tax assessed at the household level with joint taxation. The progressivity schedule applies to income shares, taking into account the number of adults and children in the tax unit. In 2023, there were five brackets, with a top marginal tax rate of 45%, and a strong phase-in mechanism. As a result, roughly half of households are liable to this income tax. The second income tax component (namely, the cotisation sociale généralisée plus the contribution pour le remboursement de la dette sociale) is a flat-rate income tax with a much broader tax base. It is proportional to labour and capital incomes with a rate of 9.2% in 2023 (since 2008).

Responses to Covid pandemic

The main economic policy response to the covid pandemic has been the use of short-term work. France had already use this scheme during the 2008 financial crisis, following Germany in that respect. The other tools used have been some reduction in employer contributions, specific pack- ages of support to some sectors particularly affected and general use of state-sponsored lending to firms in the form of guarantees to banks.


3 Notes on measurement and definitions

Unit of analysis & sample

• Sample is individuals aged between 25 and 60 inclusive, except where otherwise indicated. For figures on wages and earnings, the sample is further restricted to individuals with strictly positive wages or earnings respectively. There are no further restrictions for the household income figures.
• Individuals are the unit of analysis throughout. E.g. for equivalised household income, each individual is allocated their respective equivalised household income, so that income is counted as many times as there are individuals aged 25 to 60 in the household.
• In the figure where we winsorize, we allocate all observations above the 99th percentile the amount equal to the 99th percentile. Otherwise, distributions are not trimmed.

Datasets

We rely on three main sources for the microdata produced by the French National Institute of Statistics (INSEE):
• Labour force survey (Enquête Emploi, EE). The EE provides yearly information on the French labour market, including net wages since 1990. Although the survey became quarterly after 2002, we use the yearly version for the whole period. There are two possible levels of analysis: the individual and social household levels. The survey has been available since 1968 (although there is an earlier version starting in 1962), but includes information on earnings from 1990.

• Fiscal survey (Enquête Revenus Fiscaux et Sociaux, ERFS). The ERFS relies on the EE sample, matching with information from the fiscal administration and benefits declaration. As a result, it includes detailed information on income, taxes paid and benefits received on


top of the information also available in the EE. This survey has been available in its modern form since 1996.
• Administrative employer-employee data (Déclarations annuelles de données so- ciales, DADS). These data are available in a panel version since the late 1960s for the private sector and from 1988 for all the wage earners. They offer precise information on earnings, hours of work, occupation and firm information.


Definitions
• Employment rate: fraction of population that is employed according to self-reported em- ployment status.
• Education. We consider three education groups based on the International Standard Clas- sification of Education (ISCED) and defined as follows:
– Less than high school (HS): no education, primary education or lower secondary ed- ucation (ISCED 1–2)
– High school (HS): upper secondary education and high school diploma (ISCED 3)
– Tertiary education (ISCED 4 and above)

• Hours worked. We rely on information on the weekly number of hours usually worked, as declared by individuals.
• Hourly wage. We divide the monthly net wage, available in the EE starting in 1990, by an estimated number of monthly hours (which we get by multiplying the hours worked by
365 ×  1  ).
7	12

• Earnings: gross annual real individual earnings (includes self-employed), among those who are employed and have strictly positive real earnings.


– This measure includes employee social security contributions in the case of employed workers but excludes employer social security contributions (which are included in the labour cost measure).
– Nominal earnings are converted into real terms in calendar year 2019 or financial year 2019-20 prices, using the Consumer Prices Index.
• Disposable household income. Disposable household income is the sum of total family income from gross labour earnings, capital income, retirement income, public transfers, and social security pensions minus family direct taxes and social security contributions. Our measure is very similar to that used in other countries.
– The categories of income included do not differ, apart from capital incomes, which are included in our measure.
– Income is net of direct taxes such as income taxes and the council tax but not of indirect taxes or housing cost.
– Incomes are equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale, normalised to a single individual: 1 for the reference person of the household plus 0.5 for each ad- ditional household member aged 14 and over, plus 0.3 for each household member younger than 14 years.

Computation of employer and employee social security contributions

We rely on fiscal information on workers’ fiscal earnings and on declared information on usual hours worked to compute employer and employee social security contributions. To do so, we first compute gross earnings by reversing the employee SSCs schedule. Second, we precisely apply the SSCs schedule for all types of contributions to gross earnings. As a result, we can compute gross earnings including employer SSCs.


4 Individual employment and earnings

4.1 Trends in employment

In this section, we present the key trends in the French labour market since the late 1960s. Figure 1 describes the employment rate by age groups and sex over the period 1968–2022 using the French labour force survey (the Enquête Emploi). A number of trends are clearly visible. Firstly, the increase in female labour force participation has been steady in the prime-age group with an increase from 48% to 75% in the 50 years under study. Younger age groups, on the other hand, have suffered a very significant decline in labour force participation, prompted by an increase in education attainment and lack of labour force participation for those in full-time education (Blundell et al. 2011, 2013, see also). Older people have also experienced a significant drop in employment: the male employment rate of those aged 61–74 was close to 40% in 1968 but reached 3% in 2003. The reversal in trend since is only modest, with only 16% in employment among that group in 2022 (Salem et al. 2010, see also). Figure 2 presents the same statistics over the life cycle. It highlights that the declining trends in the French labour market have happened at the beginning and end of the age distribution, while females have been a counteracting force with increased female prime-age employment. One has to note that the decrease in employment starts in France earlier than the age 60 cut-off: one can see a significant drop in employment for males as early as age 51 and with a major drop after age 56.


FiGUre 1: Employment rates by age and sex (1968–2022)


 Male, 16-24	 Male, 25-60	 Male, 61-74
 Female, 16-24	 Female, 25-60	 Female, 61-74
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 16-74.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 2: Employment rates over life cycle by sex, selected years


 1977	 1987	 1997	 2007	 2017



100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0


Female


16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56 61 66 71 76
Age



100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0


Male


16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56 61 66 71 76
Age


Note: Sample is individuals aged 16-74.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


   With Figures 3 and 4 we document the unequal change in the labour market according to educational attainment. Figure 3 shows the increase in education that has taken place in France since the late 1970s: the group with less than high school education represented the overwhelm- ing majority of the French population in 1978 (more than 80%), and this share has decreased continuously since then to reach 37% in 2022. In parallel, those with more than high school ed- ucation have gone from 10% to 43% at the end of the period. Figure 4 splits the sample by sex to show that a gender gap in educational attainment has appeared in favour of women, who now boast more than 46% in the more than high school category against 40% for men.
FiGUre 3: Educational attainment over time


 Less than high school	 High school	 More than high school
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 4: Educational attainment by sex, over time


 Male: Less than HS	 Male: HS	 Male: More than HS  Female: Less than HS	 Female: HS	 Female: More than HS
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


   Figures 5 and 6 present the trends in employment rates over time by education and then by both sex and education. The employment rates by educational attainment are surprisingly constant over the period, with higher rates for those with higher levels of education, close to 88% for those with more than high school, 82% for those with high school level, and 70% for less than high school. In Figure 6 we also split by sex, which illustrates how the employment gap between males and females is concentrated at low education levels, although this gap has been reduced over the 40-year period.
   In Figure 7, we show the course of the ILO unemployment rate. After a stable period char- acterised by an unemployment rate below 3% before 1975, the unemployment rate consistently increased over a period of 10 years. This increase started in the aftermath of the first oil shock, which dampened the high levels of growth and productivity that were prevalent during the pe- riod 1945–75. Indeed, the unemployment rate remained high starting in 1985, oscillating around 9%. We further split the unemployment rate according to whether the individual is long-term unemployed or not. While short-term unemployment accounts for 5–8 percentage points, long-


term unemployment accounts for 3–5. More importantly, the share of long-term unemployment increased to reach around one-third of total unemployment precisely during the period when the unemployment rate tripled (1975–85). The concomitant increase in the unemployment rate and of the long-term unemployment can be interpreted as the establishment of structural unemploy- ment. As of 2023, France had not managed to return to a lower level of unemployment.
FiGUre 5: Employment rates by education (1975–2022)

100



80



60



40



20



0
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 6: Employment rates by sex and education (1975–2022)

100



80



60



40



20



0
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 7: Unemployment rate by duration of unemployment (1967–2022)


11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0



Year

Note: The short-term (long-term) unemployment rate corresponds to unemployment lasting less than 1 year (1 year or more). The unemployment definition follows ILO guidelines. For the years 1967–74 we use the total ILO unemployment rate and apply the proportion of long-term vs. short-term observed in 1975. between short-term and long-term duration.
Source: EE 2022, séries longues sur le marché du travail.



4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)

In this section we present the evidence for inequality trends in net hourly wages, focusing on individuals aged 25–60. Figure 8 shows that the median hourly wage has increased by 25% in real terms from €8.8 in 1982 to €11 in 2022. Figure 9 splits the sample by educational attainment, and we can hardly see any movement, apart from the fact that an increasing educational level has reduced the selection from the more than high school educated, who experience a drop in median real hourly wage along with their expansion within the population.
   Figure 10 details the median real hourly wage by age and sex at different periods in time and by educational attainment. Interestingly, the figure shows that the higher the level of education, the steeper the wage increase over the life cycle. Moreover, for all educational groups, the steepness clearly decreased from 1992–96 to 2015–19, and differences between men and women only appear over the course of the life cycle.
   Figure 11 shows inequality in hourly wages as measured by the Gini coefficient. It shows a large decrease from 1995 to 2010, with a Gini coefficient going from 0.25 to 0.21. Both men and women are affected by this decrease. A decrease in inequality is also observed from the 90:10 ratio, which decreased from 2.9 in 1990 to 2.4 in 2010 as shown by Figure 12. More than half of the ratio is explained by the 50:10 ratio, but the decrease was mainly driven by the 90:50 ratio. These two figures rely on the Labour Force survey which has wage information only starting from 1990 onwards. When using administrative data from Social Security (DADS data), we can get a fuller picture going back to 1967. In Appendix Figure 49 we present 90:10 wage ratios for the entire period. We can see that the period 1967-1985 is a period of strongly declining net wage inequality in France. There was then a short period of increasing wage inequality between 1985 to 1990, before the further decline observed also in the Labour Force survey data. In the earlier period, one can attribute for of the decline in wage inequality to the very large increase in the national minimum wage, visible both in pretax and net wage inequality. From 1985 onwards, pretax inequality is strongly increasing while the net wage is decreasing, which can be attributed


to the policy of payroll tax reduction around the minimum wage Bozio, Breda & Guillot (2023).
   Finally, Figure 13 shows hourly wage growth at different levels of the wage distribution. The first panel shows the evolution from 1982 to 1994 when wage growth was particularly concen- trated among higher-income individuals. For the bottom 25% of the income distribution, wage growth was around zero and even negative for the male population. The second panel shows that between 1994 and 2007, most of the wage growth was driven by the bottom of the distribution: The first percentiles of the distribution increased by more than 15% for men and 20% for women. In contrast, wage growth at the top of the distribution did not exceed 5%. This large increase at the bottom of the distribution is likely to be driven by the important increase in the minimum wage at the end of the 1990s and at the beginning of the 2000s. The third panel shows that this large increase is no longer present from 2007 to 2019, except at the very bottom of the distribu- tion for women. Overall, the increase in hourly wages was fairly homogeneous at around 0.5% throughout the distribution. However, we note a slightly positive slope for men and a negative slope for women. Although we see a reduction in the gender wage gap in the 1980s and 1990s, the recent period shows no sign of further improvements. Recent research on the gender wage gap highlights that it is now mostly related to the wage penalty of motherhood (Meurs & Pora 2019).


FiGUre 8: Median real hourly wage among employees, overall and by sex (1982–2022)

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0
1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive wages. Wages are in 2019 prices.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 9: Median real hourly wage among employees, by sex and education (1982–2022)


 Male: Less than HS	 Male: HS	 Male: More than HS  Female: Less than HS	 Female: HS	 Female: More than HS
25


20


15


10


5


0
1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive wages. Wages are in 2019 prices.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 10: Median real hourly wage (€) among employees over the life cycle, by sex and education


25	25


20	20


15	15


10	10


5


20	30	40	50	60
Age

5


20	30	40	50	60
Age

(a) 1992–96, Less than high school
25
(b) 
2015–19, Less than high school
25



20	20


15	15


10	10


5


20	30	40	50	60
Age

5


20	30	40	50	60
Age

(c) 1992–96, high school
25
(d) 
2015–19, high school
25



20	20


15	15


10	10


5


20	30	40	50	60
Age

5


20	30	40	50	60
Age

(e) 1992–96, More than high school	(f) 2015–19, More than high school

Note: Sample is individuals with strictly positive wages. Wages are shown in 2019 constant-wage terms.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 11: Gini coefficient of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time


 Male	 Female	 All

0.25


0.24


0.23


0.22


0.21


0.20
1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive hourly wages. Trimmed at the top and bottom 1% of the gender-specific hourly wage distribution.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 12: 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time


 Male 90:10	 Female 90:10	 All 90:10
 Male 50:10	 Female 50:10	 All 50:10
3.0



2.5




2.0




1.5














1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive hourly wages.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 13: Annualised growth in hourly wages among employees by wage percentile, overall and by sex, selected periods


2.0



1.5



1.0



0.5



0.0





(a) 1982–94

5  10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  60  65  70  75  80  85  90  95
Percentile


2.0




1.5




1.0




0.5




(b) 1994–2007

0.0



5  10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  60  65  70  75  80  85  90  95
Percentile


2.0




1.5




1.0




0.5




(c) 2007–19

0.0



5  10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  60  65  70  75  80  85  90  95
Percentile


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive hourly wages.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.



4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)

Trends in hours worked should be analysed jointly with trends in wages to better understand changes in the labour earnings of employees. Figure 14 shows the evolution of the average hours worked from 1982 to 2022, which slightly decreased from 38.6 to 36.9 hours a week. The figure shows a large drop between 1999 and 2001 that corresponds to the introduction of the 35-hour working week in 1998. The effect of this policy quickly faded, probably due to increased flexibility in the use of overtime, which is reflected by the sharp increase between 2002 and 2003.1
   This global trend in hours hides very different situations by level of education. As shown by Figure 15, while low-educated and high-school-educated men and women decreased their number of hours, highly educated workers increased their number of hours. These trends by level of education are partly reflected in Figure 16. From 1982–84 to 1994–96, higher-income individuals had a higher growth in working hours, and from 1994–96 to 2005–07, changes in hours were U-shaped: the bottom and top ventiles of hourly wages increased their hours, while the middle of the distribution decreased their number of hours. In the more recent years, changes in hours increased with earnings. Interestingly, women increased their hours more than men during this period.
1Note that the observed increase may also be partly explained by a methodological change in the EE. Before
2002, the EE was carried out on an annual basis. From 2002, INSEE chose to change to a quarterly basis. See
https://www.persee.fr/doc/estat_0336-1454_2003_num_362_1_7344


FiGUre 14: Mean hours worked among employees, overall and by sex (1982–2022)

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 15: Mean hours worked among employees, by sex and education (1982–2022)

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 16: Growth in mean hours worked among employees by wage percentile, overall and by sex, selected years


1.5


1.0


0.5


0.0


-0.5


-1.0


-1.5



1  2	4	6	8	10	12	14	16	18	20
Hourly Wage Ventile

(a) 1982–84 to 1994–96

1.5


1.0


0.5


0.0


-0.5


-1.0


-1.5



1  2	4	6	8	10	12	14	16	18	20
Hourly Wage Ventile

(b) 1994–96 to 2005–07

1.5


1.0


0.5


0.0


-0.5


-1.0


-1.5



1  2	4	6	8	10	12	14	16	18	20
Hourly Wage Ventile

(c) 2005–07 to 2017–19

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.



4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self- employed)
Figure 17 shows that overall, gross median individual earnings increased from €23,000 to €28,300 per year (at 2019 prices) from 1979 to 2019, and the increase was sharper for women than for men, probably reflecting the change in the situation of women on the labour market over the period. Figure 18 splits the sample by educational attainment and shows that earnings slightly decreased for men with more than high school education, and increased for all other groups of the population. The sharper increase can be attributed to low-educated women.
   Inequality in the growth of individual earnings has remained quite stable over the period at around 0.31 in terms of the Gini, as can be seen in Figure 19. By contrast, inequality in employer cost increased, as shown by Figure 20. This fact is likely due to the combination of increases in the minimum wage and large cuts in SSCs at the bottom of the distribution. This is partly illustrated by Figure 21, which shows that most of the decrease in inequality is driven by the 50:10 ratio for women. Figure 22 also shows that the increase in gross earnings has been much larger at the bottom of the distribution than at the top and that much of the increase occurred during the period 1996–2007. From 2007 to 2017, however, we see a reversal of this trend and even a decline in gross earnings for the bottom percentiles. Figure 23 again highlights the importance of SSC reforms and shows that the increase in employer cost was even lower than the change in individual earnings in the lower half of the distribution between 1996 and 2007.


FiGUre 17: Median real gross individual earnings, overall and by sex (1979–2019)

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


FiGUre 18: Median real gross individual earnings, by sex and education (1996–2019)


45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


FiGUre 19: Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex (1979–2019)

0.45


0.40


0.35


0.30


0.25


0.20


0.15
1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


FiGUre 20: Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings and total employer cost (1979–2019)

0.45


0.40


0.35


0.30


0.25


0.20


0.15
1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings. The “Employer cost” series includes Employer Social Security Contributions.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


FiGUre 21: 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex (1979–2019)


8.00





6.00





4.00





2.00

1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


FiGUre 22: Annual growth in gross earnings by earnings percentile, overall and sex, selected periods


4	4


3	3


2	2


1	1


0	0


-1	-1


-2
10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  60  65  70  75  80  85  90  95
Percentile

-2
10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  60  65  70  75  80  85  90  95
Percentile

(a) 1996–2007	(b) 2007–17

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


FiGUre 23: Growth in gross earnings and employer cost by earnings percentile, selected periods





2.0

 Gross Individual Earnings   Employer Cost




2.0

 Gross Individual Earnings   Employer Cost


1.5	1.5

1.0	1.0


0.5	0.5


0.0	0.0


-0.5	-0.5



-1.0




10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
Percentile



-1.0




10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
Percentile

(a) 1996–2007	(b) 2007–17

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


4.5 Self-employment

Overall, the share of self-employed among all working individuals has decreased over time. Fig- ure 24 shows how their share decreased steadily from around 24% in the late 1960s and bottoms out at around 12% from 2000 onward. This decline in self-employment is entirely driven by the solo self-employed – other forms of self-employment have remained largely stable over the past 50 years. Further investigating the heterogeneity in self-employment, we find differential trends for men and women in Figure 25. While both groups faced a decline in the relative importance of self-employment, that of women is much more dramatic: Almost 30% of all employed women were self-employed in 1968, a share that would fall to less than 10% by the turn of the millennium. Over the same period, men’s share has dropped from just over 20% to around 15%, a much smaller decline. Educational background seems to have played a larger role historically when individuals without high school education were more likely to be self-employed. Over time, these shares converged, and for women, the difference actually reversed, while there is no discernible differ- ence for men. Figure 26 shows another dimension of heterogeneity in self-employment, that it is largely concentrated among individuals at the top of the earnings distribution, and to a lesser extent at the bottom, with fewer self-employed in the middle. This trend has not changed much


over the three years depicted in the graph. If anything, one can see a slight decrease in the share of the top earnings percentiles for the latest curve in 2017, which is matched by a slight increase in the very bottom, but the overall distribution has remained the same.
FiGUre 24: Share of employees and self-employed workers (1968–2022)





0.28

 All self-employed	 Solo self-employed
 Other self-employed	 Employees




1.0



0.24

0.20

0.16

0.12

0.08

0.04


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2



0.00


1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

0.0


Note: Individuals age 25-60 years of age. ‘Solo self-employed’ are self-employed without employees, ‘Other
self-employed’ includes self-employed with employees and family workers. Source: French Labour Force Survey,
enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 25: Share self-employed by sex and education (1968–2022)


 Female, less than HS	 Female, HS	 Female, more than HS	 Female, All  Male, less than HS	 Male, HS	 Male, more than HS	 Male, All
0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Individuals age 25-60 years of age. ‘Solo self-employed’ are self-employed without employees, ‘Other
self-employed’ includes self-employed with employees and family workers. Source: French Labour Force Survey,
enquête emploi, Insee.

FiGUre 26: Share self-employed by percentile of individual earnings, selected years

0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0	5	10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  60  65  70  75  80  85  90  95 100
Percentile

Note: Individuals 25–60 years of age. The definition of self-employed individuals differs from that used in other figures. We consider here workers with strictly positive self-employment earnings.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


5 Labour market institutions

5.1 Minimum wage and unions

For the past 40 years, the net minimum wage in France has remained stable at around 60% of the median net wage. But as Figure 27 shows, this has not always been the case. From the mid- 1960s to the mid-1980s it saw a strong rise, jumping from less than 40% to almost 60% in just two decades. Comparing this development to the same ratio for total labour cost to firms reveals a diverging trend that started in the mid-1990s. While both ratios were intimately linked until this point, the ratio in terms of labour cost plummeted right after due to reforms of SSCs.
FiGUre 27: Bite of the minimum wage (1967–2019)


0.60



0.55



0.50



0.45



0.40



Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. It shows the ratio of the minimum wage to the median wage for the net wage (green) and the labour cost (red).
Source: DADS, Insee.


   Another diverging trend can be observed in Figure 28. Unions, historically covering about 20% of all workers in France, saw this share decreasing to 10% between 1975 and 1990. At the same time, the importance of collective bargaining increased: from 1975 onward, when they covered


around 70% of workers, collective contracts gained more and more traction and now cover close to 100% of workers.
FiGUre 28: Union density and fraction of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements, over time


 Collective contract coverage rate	 Union density
100


80


60


40


20


0
1960	1965	1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: sample is all employees.
Source: OECD.



5.2 Role of direct taxes and benefits (financial transfers from the state)

Figure 29 shows the proportion of benefits in gross income by net disposable income quartile. First and foremost, one can observe that benefits play an important role in France, as these shares are relatively high. The graph also shows the progressive nature of these benefits, since the benefit share decreases further up in the income distribution. By far the highest share of benefits pertains to the lowest income quartile, and it has increased from just over 30% in 1996 to around 35% by 2019. The other quartiles exhibit stable or slightly decreasing shares of around 15% for the second quartile, 10% for the third quartile, and 5% for the fourth quartile.
FiGUre 29: Benefits as a proportion of gross income, by quartiles of the equivalised disposable (net) income distribution


0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the OECD equivalence scale.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


   Figure 30 is another graph depicting the progressivity of the French tax and benefit system. It shows the average tax rate inclusive of SSCs paid by the worker over time and by net disposable income quartile. These average tax rates, which have been slightly increasing for all income quartiles, range from just over 10% for the lowest income quartile to 27% for the top income quartile in 2019.


FiGUre 30: Direct taxes (including employee SSCs) as a proportion of gross income, by quartiles of the equivalised disposable (net) income distribution


0.30


0.25


0.20


0.15


0.10


0.05


0.00
1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the OECD equivalence scale.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


   Figures 31 and 32 relate disposable income to gross income, and show the share of the former in terms of the latter over time and by income quartile.
FiGUre 31: Disposable income as a proportion of gross income, by quartiles of the equivalised disposable (net) income distribution


0.80




0.75




0.70




0.65




0.60
1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the OECD equivalence scale.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


FiGUre 32: Disposable income as a proportion of gross income (including employer SSCs), by quartiles of the equivalised disposable (net) income distribution


0.70




0.65




0.60




0.55




0.50
1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the OECD equivalence scale.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


6 Household incomes

6.1 Trends in household composition

Figure 33 shows the share of individuals married or cohabiting with another person by educa- tional attainment over time. Overall, this share decreased from around 80% in 1969 to less than 70% in 2021, marking a steady decline in the importance of marriage and cohabitation. This de- crease can mainly be attributed to the population with lower educational attainment. In fact, it can be observed that individuals with education beyond high school now have a higher probab- ility of being married or cohabiting than the population at large, which constitutes a reversal of the historic situation, when highly educated individuals had the lowest share in the population.
FiGUre 33: Share married/cohabiting, overall and by education (1968–2022)

1.0



0.9



0.8



0.7



0.6



0.5
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


   Marriage and cohabitation vary not only over time and by education but also by income and sex. Figure 34 depicts the relationship between an individual’s earnings and being married or cohabiting and having a working partner. There are four panels, for males and females, and for


the years 1994 and 2019. For men, we can observe that both measures of partnership tend to be higher further up the income distribution, with the exception of having a working partner in 1994, which is increasing in the low- and middle-income region, but exhibits a sharp drop among higher incomes. For women, these measures do not vary systematically with their position in the income distribution in both years; if anything one can observe a slow increase in the probability of having a working partner in 2019.
FiGUre 34: Share married/cohabiting and share with working partner, by sex and individual gross earnings percentile, selected years

1.0	1.0

0.8	0.8

0.6	0.6

0.4	0.4


0.2

0.0





0	10	20	30	40	50	60	70	80	90  100
Gross earnings percentile

0.2

0.0





0	10	20	30	40	50	60	70	80	90  100
Gross earnings percentile

(a) Male, 1994	(b) Female, 1994

1.0	1.0

0.8	0.8

0.6	0.6

0.4	0.4


0.2

0.0





0	10	20	30	40	50	60	70	80	90  100
Gross earnings percentile

0.2

0.0





0	10	20	30	40	50	60	70	80	90  100
Gross earnings percentile

(c) Male, 2019	(d) Female, 2019

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Married/ cohabitating also includes civil partnerships. The proportion with a working partner is conditional on being married/cohabiting. Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


   While the results for being married to and cohabiting with a working or non-working partner differ by sex and the relative position in the income distribution, the relation between an indi- vidual’s income and their partner’s income is more homogeneous. Individuals ranking higher in the income distribution tend to have partners who also rank higher in the income distribution


on average, as can be seen in Figure 35. This trend is similar for men and women and the two years 1996 and 2019 considered in the graph, and indicates that there has been no increase in assortative matching during the observed time period.
FiGUre 35: Mean gross earnings percentile of partner/spouse by individual’s gross earnings percentile, selected years

100.0	100.0

80.0	80.0

60.0	60.0

40.0	40.0


20.0

0.0





0	10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100
Gross earnings percentile

20.0

0.0





0	10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100
Gross earnings percentile

(a) Female	(b) Male

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 (with strictly positive earnings for defining earnings percentiles). Married/ cohabitating also includes civil partnerships.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


   Figures 36 and 37 provide more detail on how the composition of households has changed over time. Figure 36 shows the overall development for the entire population. The share of couples has slowly decreased over time, in particular those with children, while the share of singles has increased. Figure 37 goes on to show this decomposition by sex and educational attainment. The trend towards more individuals living in single households holds for all groups in the analysis, with the exception of highly educated women. Another interesting observation is that women form the vast majority of single households with children.


FiGUre 36: Share of individuals by position in the household, over time

1.0


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


0.0
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Time
 Other	 Adult child	 Couple, children  Couple, no children	 Single, children	 Single, no children

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. “Single, children” and “Couple, children” refer to children aged 0-18. Parents of adult children are categorized as “Other”. “Adult child” refers only to adults living in a household whose head is their parent.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.


FiGUre 37: Share of individuals by position in the household, by sex and education, over time



1.0


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


1.0


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2




0.0



1969  1974  1979  1984  1989  1994  1999  2004  2009  2014  2019
Time
Other	Adult child	Couple, children Couple, no children	Single, children	Single, no children


0.0



1969  1974  1979  1984  1989  1994  1999  2004  2009  2014  2019
Time
Other	Adult child	Couple, children Couple, no children	Single, children	Single, no children

(a) Female, less than high school
1.0


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2
(b) 
Male, less than high school
1.0


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2




0.0



1969  1974  1979  1984  1989  1994  1999  2004  2009  2014  2019
Time
Other	Adult child	Couple, children Couple, no children	Single, children	Single, no children


0.0



1969  1974  1979  1984  1989  1994  1999  2004  2009  2014  2019
Time
Other	Adult child	Couple, children Couple, no children	Single, children	Single, no children

(c) Female, high school
1.0


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2
(d) 
Male, high school
1.0


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2




0.0



1969  1974  1979  1984  1989  1994  1999  2004  2009  2014  2019
Time
Other	Adult child	Couple, children Couple, no children	Single, children	Single, no children


0.0



1969  1974  1979  1984  1989  1994  1999  2004  2009  2014  2019
Time
Other	Adult child	Couple, children Couple, no children	Single, children	Single, no children

(e) Female, more than high school	(f) Male, more than high school

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. “Single, children” and “Couple, children” refer to children aged 0-18. Parents of adult children are categorized as “Other”. “Adult child” refers only to adults living in a household whose head is their parent.
Source: French Labour Force Survey, enquête emploi, Insee.



6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households

The share of individuals who live in a household where at least one member is working has de- clined over time and varies starkly across levels of education. Figure 38 shows that the overall share of the population living in a household where at least one individual is working has dropped markedly in the late 1970s and 1980s, and then again in the early 2000s when it bottomed out over the rest of the decade before slowly increasing again around 2010. This development strongly differs by education: while all three groups were close to or above 95% in 1996, individuals with higher education remained relatively stable at around 97.5%, individuals with high school edu- cation saw their share decrease slightly to 95%, and individuals without a high school diploma faced the strongest decline, to less than 90%.
FiGUre 38: Share of individuals in a working household, overall and by education, over time


100

98

96


94


92

90

88


86
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in with positive household labour earnings.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


   Figure 39 shows median gross and disposable household incomes over time. The numbers have been equivalised by household composition in order to enable the comparison between different household constellations. Overall, median disposable household income increased over time from around €12,000 to €22,500 per part from 1970 to 2017, although the increase is much


less pronounced in the later quarter of the observed period. Disposable incomes for non-working households evolved in a similar fashion, but at a much lower level, until 2008. From this period onward, these households saw a decline in their disposable income that persisted until the end of the series, while no such trend can be observed for working households, where income stagnated during this period.
FiGUre 39: Median real gross household earnings and disposable household income among working households, over time


30


25


20


15


10


5


0
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in with positive household labour earnings. All incomes have been equivalised using the OECD equivalence scale. Source: ERFS, Insee.


   Figure 40 exhibits how gross and disposable household earnings of working households changed from 1994 to 2007 and from 2007 to 2017. For the earlier period, there was an almost uniform in- crease by 1.3–1.5% in disposable household earnings across the income distribution, while gross earnings increased much more at the lower end, reaching an annual growth rate of almost 6%. During the later period, the results point in the opposite direction. First of all, the overall growth rate was much lower than in the previous period, and the bottom 40% even experienced a decline in both their gross and disposable earnings on average. Furthermore, individuals at the lower end of the distribution saw a particularly sharp decline in their gross household earnings. Figure 41 portrays the change in incomes from a different point of view by looking at the evolution of me-


dian real disposable household income by level of education. Unsurprisingly, higher educational attainment is linked to a higher income at any point in time. Overall, there was a slow and steady increase until around 2008 and stagnation thereafter. Incomes have largely evolved in parallel across groups defined by education, but the differences in levels are large and persistent.
FiGUre 40: Annualised growth in real gross household earnings and household disposable income for working households, by percentile, selected years



6	6



4	4



2	2



0	0



-2	-2



-4



5  10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
Percentile


-4



5  10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
Percentile

(a) 1994–2007	(b) 2007–17

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in with positive household labour earnings. All incomes have been equivalised using the OECD equivalence scale. Source: ERFS, Insee.


FiGUre 41: Median real disposable household income for all households (in thousands of Euros), overall and by education, over time


30
25


20


15


10


5


0
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Incomes are in 2019 prices. All incomes have been equivalised using the OECD equivalence scale.
Source: ERFS, Insee.



6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households

The Figures 42 and 43 show that measures of inequality in disposable income -– including the Gini coefficient and the 90:10 ratio — somewhat decreased in the 1970s and 1980s before stabilising in the mid 1990s, for our main sample of individuals aged 25 to 60. The evolution of the top 1% share offers a contrasted picture, with stable inequality in the 1970s and 1980s, which started to increase in the late 1980s and stabilised at a high level around 2007 (see Appendix Figure 48 for an alternative figure, where the top 1% share is defined based on pretax income and comes from Bozio, Garbainti, Goupille, Guillot & Piketty (2023)). Note also that the large swing in the top 1% share in the 2013-2018 period could come from capital income taxation that has led to massive responses in the forms of reduction in dividend income in 2013, followed by a reversal in 2018 (Bach et al. 2023). The same figure also shows how relative poverty has evolved, and by contrast, there has been a slight decrease in the early 2000s before peaking and stabilising in 2010 and onward. However, levels of relative poverty are notably lower than were been up until 1990. The relatively stable inequality of incomes in Figure 42 can also be seen in Figure 43, which shows percentile ratios of disposable household incomes. All three ratios, 90:10, 50:10, and 90:50, decline from 1970 to 1990, and then remain stable over the observed time period.


FiGUre 42: Gini, relative poverty and top 1% share of net household income for all households, over time




40%

Gini	Relative poverty	 Top 1% share (right axis)
9%



35%	8%


30%	7%


25%	6%


20%	5%


15%	4%


10%

3%
1970  1975  1980  1985  1990  1995  2000  2005  2010  2015  2020
Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with less than 60% of contemporaneous median income before the deduction of housing costs. Incomes below 0 are winsorized to 0. Winsorized Gini series is also winsorized at 99th percentile. Source: ERFS, Insee.


FiGUre 43: Percentile ratios of disposable household incomes for all households, over time


5.0



4.0

3.0



2.0



1.0



0.0
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. All incomes have been equivalised using the OECD equivalence scale.
Source: ERFS.


7 Inequality between migrants and natives
Figures 44–46 explore the situation of immigrants, comparing them to the native population. In France, it is unlawful for surveys to ask about ethnicity, so research on discrimination and minorities rely often on the migrant status, or the information about the place of birth of parents (Aeberhardt et al. 2010). Figure 44 depicts the evolution of the share of immigrants in the 25– 60-year-old population, which has steadily increased from around 10% in 1996 to over 13% in 2019. More than 48% of immigrants in France come from Africa, one-third come from Europe, and 13.5% come from Asia2. More precisely, a large majority of African immigrants (about 30% of all immigrants) come from North Africa.
FiGUre 44: Share of immigrants in the population 25–60 years of age, 1996–2020


14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0
1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. All incomes have been equivalised using the OECD equivalence scale.
Source: ERFS, Insee.

   Immigrants are mainly be found in the lower end of the income distribution as can be seen in Figure 45, which shows the share of immigrants by decile of equivalised disposable household

2See for instance Insee, L’essentiel sur... les immigrés et les étrangers, July 2023.


income. However, there is a small upward trend in the share at the very top of the income dis- tribution. Over time, the share of immigrants has increased primarily at the lower end of the income distribution, while their share among top income earners has remained stable over time. More broadly, the relative position of immigrants versus the native population is worse and has deteriorated over time. Figure 46 shows more evidence of this trend. For both men and women, immigrants in 2019 scored worse in terms of educational attainment, employment rate, hours worked, earnings, and disposable income than in 1996, when compared to natives.
FiGUre 45: Share of immigrants in the population, across the disposable income distribution, 26–60 years of age, 1996, 2008 and 2019

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Decile of equivalised household income

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. All incomes have been equivalised using the OECD equivalence scale.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


FiGUre 46: Outcomes of immigrants relative to natives, ages 25–60, 1996, 2007, 2019


 1996	 2007	 2019


1.0


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


0.0


    Male Female		Male Female	 Male Female		Male Female		Male Female Share highly educated	Employment rate	Hours worked	Individual earnings	Disposable income


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. All incomes have been equivalised using the OECD equivalence scale.
Source: ERFS, Insee.


References
Aeberhardt, R., Fougère, D., Pouget, J. & Rathelot, R. (2010), ‘Wages and employment of french workers with african origin’, Journal of Population Economics 23(3), 881–905.
Bach, L., Bozio, A., Fabre, B., Guillouzouic, A., Leroy, C. & Malgouyres, C. (2023), Follow the money! Why dividends overreact to flat tax reforms.
Blundell, R., Bozio, A. & Laroque, G. (2011), ‘Labour Supply and the Extensive Margin’, American Economic Review 101(3), 482–486.
Blundell, R., Bozio, A. & Laroque, G. (2013), ‘Extensive and Intensive Margins of Labour Supply: Work and Working Hours in the US, UK and France’, Fiscal Studies 34(1), 1–29.
Bozio, A. (2023), ‘The unusual French policy mix towards labour market inequalities’, Fiscal Stud- ies .
Bozio, A., Breda, T., Grenet, J. & Guillouzouic, A. (2019), ‘Does Tax-Benefit Linkage Matter for the Incidence of Social Security Contributions?’, Working paper .
Bozio, A., Breda, T. & Guillot, M. (2023), ‘Using payroll taxes as a redistribution tool’, Journal of Public Economics 226.
Bozio, A., Garbainti, B., Goupille, J., Guillot, M. & Piketty, T. (2023), ‘Predistribution vs. Redis- tribution: Evidence from France and the U.S.’, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
.
Kramarz, F. & Philippon, T. (2001), ‘The impact of differential payroll tax subsidies on minimum wage employment’, 82(1), 115–146.
Meurs, D. & Pora, P. (2019), ‘Gender equality on the labour market in france: A slow convergence hampered by motherhood’, Economie et Statistique 510(1), 109–130.
Salem, M. B., Blanchet, D., Bozio, A. & Roger, M. (2010), Labor Force Participation by the Elderly and Employment of the Young: The Case of France, in ‘Social Security Programs and Retire- ment around the World: The Relationship to Youth Employment’, NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, pp. 119–146.
Verdugo, G. (2014), ‘The great compression of the French wage structure, 1969–2008’, Labour Economics 28, 131–144.


Appendix: additional charts
Figure 47 shows the decomposition of disposable income for each decile. The taxes include in- come and council taxes. The net earnings category includes in-work earnings of employees and the self-employed. Housing, family, and social benefits compose the “benefits” category. Social benefits include unemployment, pension, and invalidity benefits that come from previous social contributions. Due to data limitations, this category also includes alimony and child support, whether received or paid. All incomes are net of social contributions. For most of the income dis- tribution, the share of net earnings (including the self-employed) in disposable income decreases further up the income distribution, as one would expect from a progressive tax and benefit system (although the decrease is not always monotone). Moreover, the range of the decrease is similar over time, and in all three years observed it decreases from around 70% to 60%.


FiGUre 47: Share of gross individual incomes from net earnings, contributive and
non-contributive employer and employee social security contributions, by gross income decile, various years





1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0




(a) 1996


1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0




(b) 2007


1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0




(c) 2017


Net earnings (EE)	Net earnings (self-EE)	Flat income tax	 EE non-contributive SSCs ER non-contributive SSCs	EE contributive SSCs	ER contributive SSCs


1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Decile of gross income including employer contributions





Net earnings (EE)	Net earnings (self-EE)	Flat income tax	 EE non-contributive SSCs ER non-contributive SSCs	EE contributive SSCs	ER contributive SSCs


1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Decile of gross income including employer contributions





Net earnings (EE)	Net earnings (self-EE)	Flat income tax	 EE non-contributive SSCs ER non-contributive SSCs	EE contributive SSCs	ER contributive SSCs


1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Decile of gross income including employer contributions


Source: ERFS.


FiGUre 48: Gini and relative poverty of net household income for all households, top 1% share of post-tax income (1970–2020)



 Gini	 Relative poverty	 Top 1% share (right axis)

40%


35%


30%


25%


20%


15%


10%

9%


8%


7%


6%


5%


4%


3%
1970	1975	1980	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year



Note: Sample is individuals. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with less than 60% of contemporaneous median income before the deduction of housing costs. The Gini series is also restricted to positive and non equivalised household income.
Source: ERFS, Insee. Bozio, Garbainti, Goupille, Guillot & Piketty (2023) for the top 1% share of post-tax income.


FiGUre 49: P90/P10 pretax, posted and net wage ratios (1967–2019)


1.30	3.67





1.20	3.32





1.10	3





1.00	2.72
1965  1970  1975  1980  1985  1990  1995  2000  2005  2010  2015  2020
Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 20-64 working full-time in the private sector. The figure depicts the log wage ratios P90/P10 for net, gross and pretax wage. The right-hand side axis provides the equivalence with the wage ratios.
Source: DADS and Bozio et al. (2019).











lnstitute for Fiscal Studies

Country Studies: Inequalities in Europe and North America
A parallel study to the IFS Deaton Review

Maximilian Blömer Max Lay
Andreas Peichl
Ann-Christin Rathje Tamara Ritter
Paul Schüle
Anne Steuernagel










Inequality in Germany: 1983-2020










Inequality in Germany: 1983–2020
Maximilian Blömer, Max Lay, Andreas Peichl, Ann-Christin Rathje, Tamara Ritter, Paul Schüle, Anne Steuernagel1
ifo Institute

Contents
1. Executive summary	2
Employment, wages, hours and individual earnings	2
Labour market institutions	2
Household incomes	3
Inequality during the pandemic	3
2. Institutional background	5
3. Notes on measurement and definitions	8
4. Individual employment and earnings	12
4.1 Trends in employment	12
4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)	18
4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)	24
4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self-
employed)	26
4.5 Self-employment	34
5. Institutions	37
5.1 Minimum wage and unions	37
5.2 Tax and benefits (financial transfers from the state)	40
6. Household incomes	45
6.1 Trends in household composition	45
6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households	50
6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households	52
7. Inequality between migrants and natives	56
8. References	59
9. Data appendix	61
10. Appendix: additional charts	63







1 We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung through the Trans-Atlantic Platform Recovery, Renewal and Resilience in a Post-Pandemic World as part of the project “Deaton Review Country Studies: Ein transatlantischer Vergleich von Einkommensungleichheit und Chancenungleichheit über fünf Jahrzehnte (TACI) – Fallstudie Deutschland“ (grant number 01UG2214). The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not reflect the opinions of any sponsoring agency.
© ifo Institute	1

1. Executive summary
Employment, wages, hours and individual earnings

The most significant trends in the German labour market in the past decades relate to the increasing labour market participation of women. Since 1983, Germany has seen a steady and sustained rise in the employment rate for prime working-age women (aged 25–60), increasing the employment in this age group from little more than 50% in the early 1980s to more than 80% before the beginning of the COVID pandemic. Employment rates among men have remained close to constant at high levels, so that the gender employment gap still amounts to 7 percentage points in 2019. However, as younger cohorts no longer display a strong difference in male and female employment rates, it is likely that due to cohort- driven composition effects female employment among all prime working-age women will continue to grow, further narrowing the gender employment gap in the future. Overall, the major trend of increased female labour market participation has led to a steady increase in employment also in the overall population of working-age individuals.
The expansion of higher education promoted a large rise in educational attainment for both men and women. In 2021, almost 32% of prime working-age people had high levels of education, and just 10% had little or no education, compared to 10% and 25% respectively in 1984.
Over the last forty years, Germany has seen prolonged periods of poor wage growth. Median hourly wages for employees declined with the German reunification, stagnated in the following decades and have been growing only in the last pre-pandemic years. This decade-long stagnation is observed for both men and women and in all education groups.
Inequality in real gross hourly wages increased moderately between 1995 and 2005 and remained relatively stable before and after that period. Looking separately at the 90:10 ratio and the lower half of the distribution (as captured by the 50:10 ratio), we see that inequality in some of these statistics even fell in the years preceding the COVID pandemic. This development was mainly driven by real wage growth at the bottom of the income distribution.
Average hours worked by employees have remained very stable, with a small difference between men (working slightly fewer hours) and women (working slightly more hours) over the decades investigated. Consequently, the gender gap in working hours is closing very slowly. The participation of women in the labour market has increased. However, the increasing labour supply of women has mainly favoured part- time employment.
Combining trends in gross hourly wages and hours worked, inequality in individual earnings has become more severe in Germany following reunification. Moreover, the lack of substantial increases in real wages at the median means that large parts of the labour force no longer profit from economic growth, which has been weak in Germany during this period. This means that the moderate increase of median individual earnings in the last 20 years has been driven by increased employment, rather than by hours worked, and hourly wages have remained constant. However, earnings inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient or the 90:10 ratio has declined in recent years.

Labour market institutions

Collective bargaining is still the norm in many sectors of the Germany economy, with the majority of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements. However, this share has been steadily declining from 85% in the 1980s to roughly 55% in the years before the COVID pandemic. A statutory uniform minimum wage was introduced in 2015 and its bite has not changed much during the last five years. However, this may change with the substantial increase to €12 in 2022.



The share of self-employed people has been relatively low in the last decades, at around 7%, and has fallen in recent years, while the share of employees has risen steadily from 66% in 1983 to more than 80% in 2019 among prime working-age individuals.
The German social transfer and unemployment benefit system has seen a strong transformation with the Hartz reforms, implemented from 2001 to 2004. Prior to 2005, unemployment benefit replacement rates differed little with respect to duration of unemployment. Since then, unemployment benefits for long- term unemployed have been substantially reduced.

Household incomes

Two main factors have affected the way in which inequality in individual gross earnings translates into inequality in household incomes: patterns of assortative matching and changes in the tax and benefit system.
Assortative matching has become even more common in Germany over the past three decades. First, the relationship between individual earnings and the likelihood of being in a couple is now stronger than before. In lower-education groups of prime-age workers, the share of singles has increased. Second, high- earning individuals are now more likely to have a partner who works than before. Third, for couples in which both partners work, the positive correlation between partners’ earnings is now stronger than before.
The rise in assortative matching means that the catch-up of women with men over the last four decades has largely reduced earnings inequality within, rather than across, households. Coupled with the increase in inequality in male earnings, which remain the dominant source of household earnings, this led to a sharp increase in earnings inequality among working households, especially in the 1980s, up until the Great Recession of 2008–09.
The tax and benefit system somewhat dampened the rise in household earnings inequality between 1991 and 2007, but the effect was far from complete. Aggregate inequality measures, such as the Gini coefficient and the 90:10 ratio, have increased markedly since 2000. In addition, the Hartz reforms have redistributed funds from transfer recipients to working households, tending to decrease earnings inequality but increase inequality in disposable household income.
Overall, though, most indicators of income inequality have stabilised since 2005. The reasons for this development are still hotly debated and are likely manifold, potentially including the impressive decline in unemployment in the years after the Hartz reforms, the better performance of the German economy after the Financial Crisis, compositional shifts in the labour force, and the introduction of the federal minimum wage in 2015. Whatever the reason, it is clear that the period between 2005 and the COVID pandemic saw little movement in household income inequality.

Inequality during the pandemic

Like many other countries in Europe, the German economy was hit severely by the COVID pandemic, with a reduction in output more severe than during the Financial Crisis. The government reacted quickly to the adverse conditions and introduced a large set of stabilising measures. Next to an economic stimulus program and a €750 billion rescue package for small and medium-sized firms, the main pillar of the response of the German government to the pandemic was an augmented version of the pre-existing short-term work agreements. From February to May 2020, more than 10 million employees had been registered for short-term work, and numbers continued to be at historically high levels for the following months (Bundesagentur für Arbeit, 2024c).

In consequence, unemployment increased only little during the pandemic, as most employees were effectively shielded from job losses. According to official statistics, the number of people in employment fell by merely 0.8% in 2020, but the self-employed or marginally employed were significantly more affected (Statistisches Bundesamt, 2024b). The number of people in marginal employment (i.e. ‘mini- jobbers’) fell by more than 7% compared to the previous year (Bundesagentur für Arbeit, 2024b). Furthermore, due to the extensive use of short-time work, the number of hours worked by employees in 2020 fell sharply by 4,2% compared to the previous year, according to the national accounts of the Federal Statistical Office (Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis), 2024b). This was also reflected in lower gross wages and salaries for employees, although a considerable part of the income lost by short-time workers was offset by the state short-time working allowance or voluntary supplements to the short-time allowances by the employer. At 0.1%, the aggregate year-over-year decline in gross wages and salaries per employee was low compared to the decline in hours worked. This can be explained by the continued rise in collectively agreed wages in 2020 and a composition effect caused by the disproportionately sharp decline in marginally employed workers (Schmidt et al., 2021).

While official statistics provide data on aggregate hours and income measures for Germany, it is still difficult to estimate the distributional effects of the pandemic for Germany given the available data sources. This report is based on the latest version (v38.1) of the German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP), a representative household survey which covers the survey year 2021 and enables an analysis of income data for 2020 (Socio-Economic Panel, 2023). However, due to the pandemic-related contact restrictions, the data collection could not be carried out as usual, which unfortunately led to a significant drop in the number of cases for the 2021 survey year/2020 data year. In addition, analyses suggest that the standard questions in the SOEP do not adequately capture the extent and effects of short-time work in terms of hours worked, earnings and related variables (Schröder, et al., 2023). As a consequence, the results of this survey wave are subject to greater uncertainty. Whatever the short-term distributional effects of the COVID pandemic, many other aspects of the pandemic, such as prolonged school closures, are likely to have lasting effects that will take many years to materialise.


2. Institutional background
Provision of the welfare state
Germany today is characterised by a comprehensive welfare state system. Since the days of Otto von Bismarck, who over the years 1883–91 introduced health, accident, disability and old age insurance, the German welfare state has undergone significant changes in response to social, economic and political developments. Following World War II, the welfare state was further expanded to include a broader range of social programmes, including unemployment insurance and housing assistance. In the decades since, the system has continued to evolve, with reforms aimed at reducing public spending and promoting greater efficiency.

Before 2005, the unemployment benefit system in Germany was based on a replacement ratio relative to the previous net income when last employed. Unemployment benefits were lower in the long term, however, both the short-term unemployment benefit (Arbeitslosengeld) and the long-term unemployment benefit (Arbeitslosenhilfe) were based on a replacement ratio. In addition, a subsistence benefit was made available (Sozialhilfe).

The most important transformation of the German welfare state in recent decades, known as the Hartz reforms, took place in the early 2000s. The aim of the Hartz reforms was to increase the efficiency and flexibility of the labour market, reduce unemployment, and make the welfare system more responsive to the needs of individuals. The reforms included changes to unemployment benefits, job placement services, and labour market regulations, as well as the creation of new forms of employment, such as part- time and low-wage jobs. The legislation aimed to create a more dynamic and competitive labour market, while also providing greater support and opportunities for job seekers. As part of the Hartz IV package, the old long-term unemployment benefit (Arbeitslosenhilfe) was merged with the subsistence benefit (Sozialhilfe) into unemployment benefit II, at the level of the former subsistence benefit.

Since the Hartz reforms, unemployed individuals under the age of 65 who are generally able to work at least 15 hours per week are entitled to unemployment benefits if they have paid contributions to the unemployment insurance for at least 12 months within the 2 years preceding the unemployment spell. Unemployment benefits are non-means-tested benefits. They amount to 60% of previous net earnings for childless individuals and to 67% for individuals with at least one child. The duration of entitlement to ‘unemployment benefits’ depends on the individual’s age and number of months contributions were in the previous 5 years. Additional child benefit is paid if households receive an income that covers the parents’ needs according to social assistance (citizen’s benefit), but not the needs of children younger than 25 who live in the same household.

All individuals aged between 15 and their pensionable age, who are able to work for at least 3 hours per day are eligible for citizen’s benefit (formerly unemployment benefits II). Citizen’s benefit is means tested with respect to income and wealth and they are determined by the needs of the family. In addition to the basic benefits, costs for housing and heating are covered. Individuals who are not able to work at least 3 hours per day – either because they are aged 65 or older, or because they are aged 18–65 and physically not able to work – are entitled to social assistance to secure a minimum income for everybody. These benefits are again means tested with respect to income and wealth and they are determined by the needs of the entire household.

All individuals insured by the statutory health insurance are entitled to sickness benefits (healthcare costs are directly covered by the health insurance system). These are generally employees and recipients of unemployment benefits I, but not recipients of citizen’s benefit. If sickness prevents them from working, the employer is obliged to continue salary payment for 6 weeks. Afterwards, sickness benefits are paid for by the statutory health insurance.

Parents with dependent children are eligible for child benefits, paid up to the age of 18 in general or up to the age of 25 if the child is in school or in training. Parental leave benefits were implemented in 2007. They are non-means-tested benefits that generally replace between 65% and 67% of parents’ forgone net labour earnings if they suspend employment due to the birth of a child. Parental leave benefits are paid – in addition to child benefits – for a period of up to 12 months following the birth of the child. Further benefits include subsidies for housing costs, the provision of social housing, various kinds of educational benefits and savings bonuses for employees.

Social insurance contributions are paid as fixed shares of gross income up to a contribution assessment ceiling. Gross income above this ceiling is disregarded. Employees who earn more than the assessment ceiling for statutory pension insurance may opt out of statutory pension insurance completely. Concerning statutory health insurance, a different threshold (i.e. the threshold for compulsory health insurance) determines who may opt out. Employees who earn salaries above this threshold may choose private health insurance instead.

In general, most benefits in Germany go untaxed. However, a specific element of the German tax and transfer system is the progression clause. The clause is relevant for some types of income which are not directly subject to income tax (e.g., unemployment benefits I). Even though these incomes are not included in the tax base, they are included in the base used to determine the tax bracket of the progressive income tax schedule. These benefits may therefore increase the income tax rate applied to the other income sources which are subject to the income tax.

Provision of public services
Health and education are partially subsidised and partially provided for free by the government in Germany. Health insurance is mandatory for all residents, and individuals can choose between public and private insurance options. Public insurance is partially subsidised by the government, with both employers and employees contributing to the system. Co-payments are required for some medical treatments, but these are generally low. Primary, secondary and tertiary education is provided free of charge by the government, and only a small proportion of students attend private schools and universities.

In Germany, public services are provided by both local governments and the federal government. Municipality governments are responsible for providing many public services, such as public transportation, waste management, local police and fire services. The responsibility for the education system falls entirely under the jurisdiction of the German states. The resulting large variation in the design of the public education system was mandated by the Allies following World War II and has persisted ever since. Also, cultural institutions are mostly funded by either the states or the municipalities. The national/federal government, on the other hand, is responsible for providing services such as national defence, foreign affairs, and monetary policy. Overall, the division of responsibilities between regional and national government entities is a key aspect of Germany's constitutional system.

Tax system
The major taxes in Germany are levied by the federal government, with income tax and value-added tax (VAT) ranking first and second in terms of tax revenues. Income tax is levied on a progressive basis, with tax rates ranging from 0% to 42%, and an extra bracket of 45% for incomes above €277,826 per year. There are numerous allowances and deductions in place. For example, individuals with low incomes may be eligible for deductions such as the basic allowance or the child allowance.

In the German income tax system in general, married couples are taxed jointly with full income splitting, that is, the tax function is applied to half of the sum of the spouses’ taxable incomes, and then the resulting tax amount is doubled. In 2000–03, a bigger income tax change was implemented, with deeper income tax cuts for higher incomes (top marginal income tax rates decreased from 53% to 42%). Up to 2021 there was a surcharge of 5.5% on the income tax paid, which was originally intended to be put towards the costs of the German reunification. In 2021, the solidarity surcharge was partly abolished and as of now only taxpayers with taxable income above €96,802 are fully subject to the solidarity surcharge.



The main tax levied on consumption is VAT, set at a standard rate of 19% and with a reduced rate of 7% for certain goods and services. The federal government is furthermore responsible for levying the corporate income tax and various excise taxes, in particular on electricity and gasoline. Revenue from most federal taxes is distributed jointly among the federal government, the states, and the municipalities, with the states receiving the majority of revenues.

While the German states play an import role in the legislative system, their ability to raise tax revenues is very limited. States mainly levy the property acquisition tax, a tax due when real property is transferred, and inheritance tax. All state taxes combined make up less than 4% of total tax revenue. Municipalities are in charge of the property tax and local business taxes. The local business tax constitutes an important source of revenues for the municipalities, and the concentration of business activity in certain regions therefore creates large and persistent differences in the municipalities’ fiscal capacity and the infrastructure which can be provided locally.

Looking at the tax and transfer system as a whole, its main redistributive effects are due to transfers targeted at low-income households and the provision of public services, while the tax system itself is only mildly progressive as VAT and social security contributions counteract the progressiveness of the income tax.

Response to the COVID pandemic
As in many other countries, the German economy has been deeply affected by the COVID pandemic. In the first quarter of 2020, output fell by 2.2% compared with the previous quarter, marking the sharpest decline since the financial and economic crisis of 2009. In the second quarter, economic output fell by a further 9.7%, which was the sharpest decline since the introduction of quarterly calculations in 1970. Overall, GDP in Germany in 2020 fell by 5.0% year-on-year, and government budgets ended 2020 with a deficit of around 5% of GDP (Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis), 2024b).

The main tool to capture the impact of COVID on the labour market has been a massive use of short-term work. Short-term work had been a popular measure also in prior economic crises, but the numbers of workers in short-term work during 2020 and 2021 were the highest ever recorded. In May 2020, companies had already registered short-time work for more than 10 million people (Bundesagentur für Arbeit, 2024c). Consequently, Germany experienced only a very moderate increase in unemployment during the pandemic. The existing regulations for accessing short-term work were made more lenient, and this facilitated access was extended until June 2023. While regularly employed workers were thus mainly shielded from substantial income losses, the marginally employed and self-employed were hit most by the pandemic.

Furthermore, many companies suffered severely in the crisis. Particularly hit were the sectors directly affected by lockdowns such as tourism and hospitality, transport, culture, and retail. However, sectors relying over-proportionally on exports, such as the automobile industry, also suffered considerable during the crisis. In response, in March 2020 the German government implemented a rescue package for small and medium-sized firms worth €750 billion. This has helped to stabilise the number of business insolvencies during and after the COVID crisis. To stabilise consumption and the macroeconomy, the German government further set up a €130 billion COVID stimulus package consisting of 57 measures. The most prominent was a temporary reduction in the VAT rate from 19% to 16%.

3. Notes on measurement and definitions
Time periods

? The analysis in this study is mostly based on the Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP), which started conducting household surveys in 1984. Hence, the analysis for Germany begins in 1984, although most income-related questions refer to the year prior to the interview, which makes 1983 the starting point for the analysis.

? This report is based on the latest version (v38.1) of the SOEP, which covers the survey year 2021 and allows the analysis of most income-related data for 2020 (Socio-Economic Panel, 2023). However, difficulties in data collection due to pandemic-related contact restrictions in Germany led to a significant drop in numbers of observations in the SOEP in 2020/2021 (see also chapter 9. Data appendix). In addition, analyses suggest that the standard questions in the SOEP on working hours and gross earnings do not adequately capture the extent and effects of short-time work in Germany in terms of working hours, earnings and related variables (see the following variable definitions). Consequently, the results of this wave are subject to greater uncertainty.

? Due to the reunification of Germany in October 1990 we have chosen to break the data at 1983, 1990/1991, 2007 and 2019. East German individuals are included in the SOEP from 1991 onwards.

Unit of analysis and sample

? The sample analysed consists of individuals aged between 25 and 60 inclusive, except where otherwise indicated. For figures on wages and earnings, the sample is further restricted to individuals (or households where applicable) with strictly positive wages or earnings. There are no further restrictions for the household income figures.

? Individuals are the unit of analysis throughout. For example, when analysing equivalised household income, each individual is allocated their respective equivalised household income, so that the specific household income is counted as many times as there are individuals aged 25– 60 in the household.

? In the chart on the Gini coefficient of net household income where we winsorise (Figure 42), we allocate all observations above the 99th percentile the amount equal to the 99th percentile. Household disposable income does not contain negative values.

? Moreover, in the figure on the Gini coefficient of gross hourly wages among employees (Figure 11), we exclude the bottom and top 1% of the gender-specific distribution from the analysis.

? Otherwise, distributions are not trimmed.

? In the whole analysis the cross-sectional sampling weights at the individual level provided by the SOEP are used.

Definitions

? Employment rate: the fraction of the population that is employed. Individuals are considered employed if they have positive earnings (either from labour income or from self-employment) and worked at least 52 hours per year.



? Earnings: gross annual real individual earnings (including self-employed), among those who are employed and have strictly positive real earnings.

o Earnings include wages and salary from all employment, including primary and secondary jobs, and self-employment, training, plus income from bonuses, overtime, and profit- sharing. Specifically, labour earnings are the sum of income from primary and secondary jobs, self-employment, 13th and 14th month pay, Christmas bonus pay, holiday bonus pay, miscellaneous bonus pay, and profit-sharing income. Since 1991 indemnity payments, since 1996 military service payments and since 2006 commuting expenses or travel grants are also considered. If an employee has multiple jobs, earnings from all jobs are summed together (Grabka, 2022, p. 50).

o Most figures include employee taxes but not employer taxes, pension contributions or other contributions (e.g. health insurance). Some figures explicitly compare trends in gross earnings with and without employer taxes.

o Employer costs are taken to consist of the social security contributions that are paid by the employer. In Germany, social security contributions are levied on gross earnings and paid approximately half by the employer and half by the employee. (This split is just the de jure payment and might not coincide with the economic incidence.) Social security consists of contributions to health insurance, long-term care insurance, unemployment insurance and the public pension system. Social security contributions are in general around 40% of the gross wage up to a certain threshold. Approximately half of this is paid by the employer. There are some exemptions from social insurance: First, there is the concept of marginal employment (‘mini-jobs’; in 2023 with a threshold of €520 per month, previously €450 per month) where the employee does not pay social security contributions. However, the employer still has costs in the form of contributions and fees to the social security scheme. Second, there is a phase-in zone after this threshold. Third, the social security contributions are capped at gross wages of around €60,000 per year.

o Social security contributions are calculated for the SOEP dataset at the individual level using the ifo microsimulation model for all years 1983–2020. For details, see Blömer and Peichl (2020).

o In Germany, data on earnings are obtained as follows:

* Information on individual wages or salaries of employees as well as income from self- employment is obtained by calculating the product of the number of months income was received in the previous year and the average amount per month.

* Income in kind (e.g., vehicles, computers and mobile phones purchased by the business that are also for personal use) is not captured in the survey. These benefits are likely to be more important for the self-employed than for employees. Therefore, earnings measures are likely to underestimate the true monetary and other benefits of self- employment. However, it is very difficult to quantify this.

o The information provided by the individuals surveyed on gross monthly salaries is subject to greater uncertainty for employees on short-time work since the outbreak of the COVID pandemic. A special analysis of the SOEP for the years 2020 and 2021 suggests that some employees on short-time work stated their gross earnings including the short-time work allowance in the survey, so that the state transfer is included in the information on gross earnings (Schröder, et al., 2023). This would explain why the decline in gross earnings for employees on short-time work is comparatively low compared to the reported reduction in working hours. As a result, gross earnings in the data year 2020 are likely to be overestimated and only partially reflect the extensive use of short-time work in Germany.

o Nominal earnings are converted into real terms based on calendar year 2020, using the CPI from 1991 and the price index for living expenses of all private households for the former federal territory of western Germany for the previous years provided by the federal statistical office (Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis), 2024a).

? Hours of work: actual hours worked per week, including overtime, among those who are employed. Hours are strictly positive.

o Hours of work are constructed by adding together the annual hours of full-time, part-time (including marginal employed), vocational training and short-time work. To obtain weekly hours of work, annual measures are divided by the number of weeks in a year. No correction for vacations or sickness has been made. Excludes self-employed workers.

o For the question on hours worked, respondents were asked to indicate the average number of hours worked including overtime. This wording is intended to ensure that the respondents' answers are smoothed out by temporary outliers. This applies to temporary reductions in hours worked e.g. due to holidays, vacation or illness, as well as for temporary peaks, e.g. due to staff shortages or the scheduling of major projects in the companies. However, with regard to actual hours worked, it must be assumed that short-time workers might not have taken into account the temporary reduction in their working hours due to short-time work when reporting their average working time.2 As a result, the number of hours worked in 2020 is likely to be overestimated and only partially reflects the extensive use of short-time work in Germany.

? Wages: individual real gross hourly wages (annual gross employee earnings divided by annual hours worked as defined above). Excludes self-employed workers.

o We convert nominal wages into real terms based on calendar year 2020, using the CPI (not adjusted for mortgage interest) from 1991 and the price index for living expenses of all private households for the former federal territory of western Germany for the previous years provided by the federal statistical office (Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis), 2024a).

o Due to the uncertainties regarding the data on gross earnings and hours worked in connection with short-time work during the 2020 pandemic year, the results for hourly wages are also subject to greater uncertainty.

? Disposable household income (household equivalised income after deducting taxes and adding benefits and tax credits)

o Disposable household income is the sum of total family income from gross labour earnings, asset flows, private retirement income, private transfers, public transfers, and social security pensions minus total family taxes and social security contributions. Labour earnings include wages and salary from all employment, including training, self-employment income, bonuses, overtime, and profit-sharing. Asset flows include income from interest, dividends and rent. Private transfers include payments from individuals outside the household, including alimony and child support payments. Public transfers include housing allowances, child benefits, subsistence assistance, special circumstances benefits, government student assistance, maternity benefits, unemployment benefits, unemployment assistance, and unemployment subsistence allowance. Social security pensions include payments from old age, disability and widowhood pension schemes. Income is net of income tax payment and

2 Schröder et al. (2023) analyse the development of actual working hours of short-time workers during the COVID pandemic in the SOEP. They conclude that the reduction in actual working hours in 2020 for the sample of short-time workers is relatively small compared to the decrease in working hours that they find in a retrospective analysis of special questions on short-time work. In a special question in 2021, respondents were asked how many hours their working week was reduced on average while they were on short-time work.



payroll taxes such as health, unemployment, retirement insurance and nursing home insurance taxes (Grabka, 2022, p. 42).

o Incomes are equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale, normalised to a single individual.

Splits

? Sex: female, male

? Education: For the German case the education variables are split into the following three groups based on the International Standard Classification of Education: ISCED 0–2, ISCED 3–5 and ISCED 6–8. Since the ISCED 2011 classification is only available from 2010 onwards, we use ISCED 1997 information for the period from 1984 to 2009.

? Household type: Single without dependent children; single with dependent children; couples without dependent children; couples with dependent children; adult child; other. Parents of adult children are included in the ‘other’ category. A dependent child is a child aged 0–15 or 16– 19 and in full-time education, living with parents.

? Immigration: Persons are classified as immigrants if they individually have a direct migration background (i.e., if they were not born in Germany). The country of origin of immigrants corresponds to the respective country of birth.

Other clarifications

? Growth incidence curves: These give the growth of each percentile of the distribution, where the percentile p is the level of a given variable such that p% of the population have lower values of that variable than that level. They do not give, for example, the mean growth within each percentile.

4. Individual employment and earnings
This section looks at trends in individual employment and earnings. With respect to earnings, we first look separately at hourly wages and hours worked, before analysing them together using a set of charts on earnings inequality.

4.1 Trends in employment

Figure 1 shows that since 1983, Germany has seen a steady and sustained rise in the employment rate for prime working-age women (aged 25–60), increasing the employment in this age group from little more than 50% in the early 1980s to more than 80% before the beginning of the COVID pandemic. By 2019, the gender employment gap had narrowed from almost 40 to around 7 percentage points. For prime working-age men, the employment rate has been very stable at around 90% throughout the whole period up to the outbreak of the COVID pandemic.

Likewise, employment rates among the young have remained quite stable, albeit at lower levels. Remarkably, there was no level difference in male and female employment rates even in the 1980s. This suggests that the remaining 7 percentage point employment gender gap among prime working-age women may decline further as well as soon as the younger cohorts have fully entered working age.

Among older men and women (aged 61–74), there has been fast growth in employment in the last two decades. This development reflects gradual increases to the retirement age, as well as enhanced possibilities and incentives for part-time employment during pension age.3

Figure 2 repeats this evidence in a graphical representation adjusted to the life cycle. For men below age 60, employment rates in 2019 were fairly similar to 1983. Increases in employment are visible only for older men close to retirement. In contrast, employment rates for women rose steadily. As a general pattern, these employment gains over the years have tended to increase in age. Among others, this reflects the fact that mothers in Germany who are leaving the labour market entirely after the birth of their first child have become less common in Germany. Instead, recently, more women have been returning to their jobs after some time.
















3 In 2014, a reform to simplify employment relationships beyond the statutory retirement age has been implemented. With the introduction of the Flexirentengesetz 2016/2017, there were also adjustments to the additional earnings rule and increased pension supplements for employment beyond the statutory retirement age.



Figure 1. Employment rates by age and sex, over time




Note: Sample is individuals aged 16–74. Until 1990: West Germany only.
Figure 2. Employment rates over life cycle by sex, selected years





Note: Sample is individuals aged 16–74. Employment rates have been smoothed by calculating 5-year averages across age of individuals. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 3. Educational attainment over time




Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 4. Educational attainment by sex, over time




Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education. Until 1990: West Germany only.



We now focus on individuals of prime working age (25–60). Since the 1970s, there has been a significant expansion of education and educational attainment in Germany, partially pre-dating our observation window. Under the umbrella of the so-called ‘Bildungsexpansion, policymakers in Germany triggered a series of reforms aimed at the expansion of higher education. This resulted in an increased school leaving age (which differs by federal state in Germany), more places in upper secondary education and an expansion of the university system, which saw the foundation of many new universities in the 1970s. Consequently, in the overall population, educational attainments in higher education have increased significantly. As shown in Figure 3, the share of people having a degree within the categories ISCED 6–8 tripled from nearly 10% to around 32% in 2021. Analogously, the number with little or no education has declined strongly over the same period and stood at only 10% in 2021.

While these trends have been similar for both men and women (Figure 4), the drop in the share of people in the lowest education categories (ISCED 0–2) is mainly driven by females, where the numbers decrease from more than one-third of the population in 1983 to under 10% in 2021.

Figure 5 shows that the general upward trend in employment has differed little by educational background. Although employment has risen somewhat faster for those with low-level or no qualifications, the difference in employment levels by educational attainment still persists: while in 2019 93% of high skilled individuals in Germany were employed, only 65% of those with low-level or no qualifications (ISCED 0–2) participate in the labour market.

As seen in Figure 6, the general upward trend in employment is mainly driven by higher employment rates among women with middle (ISCED 3–5) or high (ISCED 6–8) levels of educational attainment.

Figure 5. Employment rates by education, over time




Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education. Until 1990: West Germany only.


 




Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education. Until 1990: West Germany only.


We know look at the unemployment rate (Figure 7). Overall, the unemployment rate of the reunited Germany is significantly higher than in the years before (where only West Germany is shown). After reunification, many people of the East German labour force initially lost their jobs in the previously state-regulated economy of the German Democratic Republic due to the shutdown of less productive East German establishments. However, most of these individuals found new work in the following years, so that unemployment rates started to decline again.

However, unemployment rates increased again after 2000 and started to decline only after the implementation of the Hartz reforms in the labour market. The share of short-term unemployed workers has decreased steadily since and stands at approximately 2%, whereas the number of long-term unemployed has been declining only slowly. Compared with the official statistics of the German Federal Employment Agency on long-term unemployment, it must be pointed out that the number of long-term unemployed seems to be overestimated in the SOEP data. However, the decline in unemployment in the figures of the Federal Employment Agency is also largely due to lower short-term unemployment.



As of today, for individuals with basic qualifications and the willingness to work the German economy is close to full employment. Due to demographic changes, which increasingly affect the German economy, this situation will likely persist for many years, as most companies struggle to fill vacancies, especially in low -paid occupations. However, Germany is failing to reduce the substantial stock of long-term unemployed. These are individuals lacking even basic qualifications (and thus will not be hired on the primary labour market), or individuals who could work but voluntarily refrain from doing so. In this context there is a constant discussion in German academia and politics about the level of unemployment benefits as well as the transfer withdrawal scheme. The unemployment benefit II system as well as housing benefits and the additional child benefit is characterised by a strong transfer withdrawal rate once people start working, resulting in very low net hourly wages for an additional hour of work for meaningful number of hours. Effective marginal tax rates can be close to 100%, resulting in very low net hourly wage increases for some individuals especially in the lower wage sector. The issue of high phase-out rates in Germany is well known and has long been criticised by economists (see, for example, Blömer, Fuest and Peichl, 2019; Walwei et al., 2019; or Bruckmeier, Mühlhan and Wiemers, 2018). However, none of the past governments has implemented a substantial reform of the transfer system.

With regard to the COVID pandemic, a sharp decline in employment was prevented by the massive use and expansion of short-time working regulations. In April and May 2020, more than 5 million short-time workers were registered with the Federal Employment Agency, and numbers continued to be at historically high levels for the following months (Bundesagentur für Arbeit, 2024c). In consequence, unemployment increased only little during the pandemic, as most employees were effectively shielded from job losses. According to official statistics, the unemployment rate rose from 5.0 to 5.9 percent from 2019 to 2020 (Bundesagentur für Arbeit, 2024a) and the number of people in employment fell by merely 0.8% in 2020 (Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis), 2024b). However, the impact on the labour market has been very heterogeneous across different social groups. The number of self-employed people and the number of people in marginal employment were significantly more affected in 2020 than employees subject to social security contributions. The number of people in marginal employment (e.g. low-income earners such as mini-jobbers) fell by more than 7% compared to the previous year (Bundesagentur für Arbeit, 2024b).

The results from the SOEP also show an increase in the unemployment rate for 2020. The decline in employment appears to be somewhat more pronounced in the SOEP than in the overall aggregates of the national accounts, but also shows clear differences between different age and education groups. The decline in employment is much more pronounced for the younger age cohorts (16-24-year-olds) and for individuals with a lower level of education (ISCED 0-2).

15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0


Year



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Unemployment rate is split between short-term (less than 1 year) and long-term (1 year or more) duration of unemployment. An unemployed person is defined as someone who is registered as a jobseeker at the Federal Employment Agency. Until 1990: West Germany only. In 1991 East German individuals were not asked about the length of unemployment.


4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)

Real median hourly wages grew little between 1983 and 2019. Until 1990 there was a steady increase in real wages at the median (West Germany only). With the structural break in 1990, reflecting the sample of reunified Germany, from 1991 on, median wages did not increase for a long time. Real median hourly wages actually fell below the 1991 level between 2008 and 2013. Growth in median wages was limited to the last few years before the COVID pandemic. Over the period from 1991 (after reunification) to 2019 (before the outbreak of the COVID pandemic), real hourly median wages increased by about 14%. Notably, we also do not see an impact of the Great Recession of 2008–09 on median hourly wages. Figure 8 and Figure 9 show that these trends have been similar for males and females, and across education groups. What stands out in Figure 9 is that median wages for high-qualified males are substantially higher than in all other parts of the labour force. This pattern has not changed in recent decades, although the gender gap in median hourly wage has narrowed slightly in recent decades. Moreover, the analysis shows that growth in median wages was especially low or even negative for low-skilled individuals, while hourly wages for women with tertiary education rose markedly in more recent years.



With respect to the COVID pandemic, this analysis shows a substantial increase in real median hourly wages for both men and women for the year 2020.4 Possible explanations for the rise in median hourly wages in 2020 could include both the continued strong increases in collectively agreed wages in 2020, as well as a composition effect caused by the disproportionately sharp decline in marginally employed workers in the lower tail of the wage distribution. However, the results for hourly wages are also subject to greater uncertainty due to the insecurities regarding the data on gross income and hours worked in connection with short-time work during the 2020 pandemic year (see chapter 3. Notes on measurement and definitions).

Figure 8. Median real hourly wage among employees, overall and by sex, over time





Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. The sample does not include individuals with earnings from self-employment. Individuals with both earnings from employment and self-employment are also excluded from the analysis, leaving only employees’ hourly wages. Wages are in 2020 prices. Until 1990: West Germany only.















4 An analysis of monthly income data for dependent employees in their main job based on the SOEP by Grabka (2024) also shows a strong increase in real median hourly wages for the pandemic years 2020 and 2021.


 





Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education. The sample does not include individuals with earnings from self-employment. Individuals with both earnings from employment and self-employment are also excluded from the analysis, leaving only employees’ hourly wages. Until 1990: West Germany only. Wages are in 2020 prices.

Figure 10 shows median wages over the life cycle by sex and education, for different time periods. Individuals with lower levels of education see a flatter wage profile over the life cycle, with men with little or no education (ISCED 0–2) and women with low to middle levels of education (ISCED 0–2 and 3–5) seeing little wage growth over their working lives. For individuals with degrees (ISCED 6–8), men and women have the same median wage at age 25 in more recent years, but the gender wage gap gradually opens between the ages of 25 and 35 and persists until retirement age.



Figure 10. Median real hourly wage among employees over life cycle, by sex and education

1984 to 1992




1998 to 2006




2011 to 2019





Note: Sample is employees aged 16-60. The sample does not include individuals with earnings from self-employment. Individuals with both earnings from employment and self-employment are also excluded from the analysis, leaving only employees’ hourly wages. Wages are shown in 2020 constant-wage terms. Five-year smoothing across ages has been applied. Due to small sample size,

hourly wages for individuals aged over 60 are excluded. For the same reason hourly wages for the period 1984–92 for high-skilled female individuals are not shown. Until 1990: West Germany only.


Figure 11 and Figure 12 plot trends in wage inequality using the Gini coefficient, the 90:10 ratio and the 50:10 ratio. Wage inequality as measured by the Gini grew from 1991 to 2009 and has been very stable ever since around a value of 0.28. Looking separately at the 90:10 ratio and the lower half of the distribution (as captured by the 50:10 ratio), we see that inequality in some of these statistics even fell in the years preceding the outbreak of the COVID pandemic. This development was mainly driven by real wage growth at the bottom of the income distribution, as captured in Figure 13. For the first year of the pandemic, 2020, the results show a sharp increase in the Gini coefficient for hourly wages. Figure 12 shows that this is accompanied by an increase in the 90:10 percentile ratio in 2020, while the 50:10 ratios tend to stagnate.

Figure 11. Gini coefficient of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time, excluding top and bottom 1% of gender specific wage distributions





Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. The sample does not include individuals with earnings from self-employment. Individuals with both earnings from employment and self-employment are also excluded from the analysis, leaving only employees’ hourly wages. We exclude the bottom and top 1% of the gender-specific distribution of hourly wages from the analysis. Until 1990: West Germany only.



Figure 12. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time






Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. The sample does not include individuals with earnings from self-employment. Individuals with both earnings from employment and self-employment are also excluded from the analysis, leaving only employees’ hourly wages. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 13 shows in more detail the changes in hourly wages across the wage distribution. The annualised growth in real hourly wages by wage percentile is shown. Positive values for a given percentile denote an increase in wages measured at that percentile. The period between 1983 and 1990 in West Germany was one of high and relatively inclusive wage growth, with wages growing by nearly 2% a year for men and 3% for women across most of the distribution.

In contrast, wage inequality increased moderately between 1991 and 2007. While real wages remained constant in the middle range of the wage distribution, individuals in the bottom part of the distribution experienced small real wage losses. Only top wage earners were able to achieve small wage gains in real terms. Overall, growth rates for the entire income distribution were significantly lower during this period. Between 2007 and 2019, the pattern changed again to mostly inclusive growth, with real wage growth of 1% for men and 2% for women each year, and on average higher growth rates at the bottom of the distribution.

Figure 13. Annualised growth in hourly wages among employees by wage percentile, overall and by sex, selected periods




















Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. The sample does not include individuals with earnings from self-employment. Individuals with both earnings from employment and self-employment are also excluded from the analysis, leaving only employees’ hourly wages. Until 1990: West Germany only.

4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)
Figure 14 shows that average hours worked among employees have remained very stable, with a small difference between men (working slightly fewer hours) and women (working slightly more hours). Consequently, the gender gap in working hours is closing very slowly. This implies that the increased participation of women in the labour market happened predominantly at the extensive and not at the intensive margin. The trends also look similar when working hours are plotted separately by education (Figure 15). However, the overall increase in working hours for women is mainly driven by medium- or higher-skilled individuals. The average number of working hours per week for lower-skilled individuals declined substantially over the period from 1983 to 2019.

As already noted in Chapter 3. Notes on measurement and definitions it must be assumed that the extensive use of short-time work during the COVID pandemic and the corresponding reduction in working hours is not adequately reflected in the variable on working hours in the SOEP. The Federal Statistical Office shows a decline in the aggregate number of hours worked by employees of over 4% in 2020 (Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis), 2024b). There is no corresponding decline in average working hours in the SOEP data, as short-time workers presumably did not indicate the temporary reduction in working hours due to short-time work when stating their average working hours. The SOEP results on working hours reflect rather a continuation of the long-term trend, with slightly increasing (decreasing) average working hours for women (men).



Figure 14. Mean hours worked among employees, overall and by sex, over time




Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. The sample does not include individuals with earnings from self-employment. Individuals with both earnings from employment and self-employment are also excluded from the analysis, leaving only hours worked by employees. Hours include paid (but not unpaid) overtime. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 15. Mean hours worked among employees, by sex and education, over time




Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education. The sample does not include individuals with earnings from self-employment. Individuals with both earnings from employment and self-employment are also excluded from the analysis, leaving only hours worked by employees. Hours include paid (but not unpaid) overtime. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 16 shows the growth in average hours worked along the hourly wage distribution for different time periods. The development of working hours along the income distribution was shaped in earlier years by declining numbers of working hours for female individuals in the bottom as well as in the upper part of the distribution. The period from 1991–93 to 2005–07 was characterised by a stagnation or only small increases in working hours along the hourly wage distribution, with a decline in hours worked by (female) individuals situated in the lower part of the wage distribution. In more recent years, this pattern reversed and women in the lower half of the income distribution experienced more substantial growth in working hours than their male counterparts. Part of this change results potentially from the Hartz reforms, which transformed the German unemployment insurance system in 2004 and reduced the incentives for non- working partners to stay at home. Another potential channel is the strong growth in childcare supply during this period.

Figure 16. Annualised growth in mean hours worked among employees by hourly wage ventile, overall and by sex, selected years






















Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. The sample does not include individuals with earnings from self-employment. Individuals with both earnings from employment and self-employment are also excluded from the analysis, leaving only hours worked by employees. Hours include paid (but not unpaid) overtime. Until 1990: West Germany only.

4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self- employed)

We now turn to trends in individual earnings, which reflect the combination of trends in hours worked and hourly wages. Before we go on to examine distributional measures,



Figure 17 shows trends in median earnings, which are mainly driven by median wage changes – median hours have been comparatively stable over time. The figure shows again that after the reunification, Germany saw a stagnation or even reduction in real median earnings. Only in the years immediately before the COVID pandemic did real median earnings start to grow again. In real terms median gross individual earnings in Germany as a whole, including the eastern German states, were roughly on a par in 2019 with what was achieved in the western German states in 1990.

Figure 18 shows that the absence of growth in individual earnings mainly stems from those with low- level qualifications (ISCED 0–2), though trends by education could be affected by selection (given the increase in educational attainment over this period). In particular, the median wages of men with low levels of qualifications were still lower in 2019 than in 1983. Increases in median gross individual earnings can be observed mainly for the group of individuals with tertiary education; this is true especially for high-skilled women who experienced growth in individual earnings in the aftermath of the Great Recession.

In the first year of the COVID pandemic, median real gross earnings continue to rise markedly in parallel with median hourly wages. Again, this might be due to considerable increases in collectively agreed wages in 2020 or a composition effect caused by the disproportionately sharp decline in marginally employed workers in the lower tail of the income distribution. However, the results for gross individual earnings are also subject to greater uncertainty and gross earnings in the data year 2020 are likely to be overestimated for short-time workers (see chapter 3. Notes on measurement and definitions).

Figure 17. Median real gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time




Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–60. Individuals are considered in work if they worked at least 52 hours in the year preceding the survey and received earnings either from labour income or from self-employment. Hence, both employees and self- employed workers are represented. Gross earnings are in 2020 prices. Until 1990: West Germany only.



Figure 18. Median real gross individual earnings, by sex and education, over time
 



Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education. Individuals are considered in work if they worked at least 52 hours in the year preceding the survey and received earnings either from labour income or from self-employment. Hence, both employees and self-employed workers are represented. Gross earnings are in 2020 prices. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 19 shows that overall earnings inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient has recently declined, after a long period of growing inequality, especially during the period 1995–2005. The reasons why the Gini coefficient has not increased further after 2005 are diverse (Biewen, Ungerer and Löffler, 2019). The recent decline in the Gini can be partially attributed to a reduction in female earnings inequality. This decrease arises partially due to an increase in hours worked among women who previously worked less than full-time. In addition, the introduction of the minimum wage and increases in the mini-job threshold are both measures that have predominantly affected women and that have also contributed to a decrease in inequality (compare also Figure 11). Hence, the decline in female earnings inequality happened mostly in the bottom half of the earnings distribution.

Inequality in men’s earnings has stabilised at a level of 0.36 – up from 0.26 in the 1980s. As shown above, this rise in male earnings inequality has been driven by rising wage inequality rather than rising hours inequality. Overall, earnings inequality has become more severe in Germany following the reunification.

The results indicate that the Gini coefficient decreases from 2019 to 2020. This contrasts with the rising Gini coefficient for hourly wages (see Figure 11). This is partly due to the fact, that hourly wages in the upper part of the income distribution have risen sharply, while the highest growth rates for earnings are to be found in the lower and middle parts of the distribution. This could be related to the fact that income losses of short-time workers are not fully but partially reflected in earnings. In addition, Figure 19 is based on the sample of employees and the self-employed, while the analysis of hourly wages only includes employees. Overall, however, the results should be interpreted with caution due to the difficulties mentioned above.

Figure 19. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time




Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–60. Individuals are considered in work if they worked at least 52 hours in the year preceding the survey and received earnings either from labour income or from self-employment. Hence, both employees and self- employed workers are represented. Until 1990: West Germany only. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 20 shows how the Gini coefficient for earnings differs in levels when they are considered on an ‘employer cost’ basis, including employer social security contributions to better reflect the direct labour cost of employers of employing an individual. Trends have been very similar over time. The curves for the Gini coefficient based on gross individual earnings and employer costs move almost in parallel over time. However, the curve for the Gini coefficient of gross earnings lies above the labour cost series in all years. One of the reasons for this is that no further social security contributions are payable by employers for earnings above a certain income threshold and social security contributions do not continue to increase proportionally with gross earnings above the assessment ceiling, while gross wages up to the income threshold are increased by employers' social security contributions in the employer cost calculation.



Figure 20. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings and total employer cost, over time




Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–60. Individuals are considered in work if they worked at least 52 hours in the year preceding the survey and received earnings either from labour income or from self-employment. Hence, both employees and self- employed workers are represented. The ‘employer cost’ series includes employer social security contributions. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 21 shows earnings inequality as captured by both the 90:10 and 50:10 percentile ratios. Inequality has fallen across most of the distribution in the last decade after substantial increases in earnings dispersion in the period from 1993 to 2011. Over the whole period, there has been only a small rise in inequality due to shifts in the lower half of the income distribution (captured by the 50:10 ratio) but moderate increases in the 90:10 ratio, with gross individual earnings at the 90th percentile being more than eight times higher than income at the 10th percentile in 2019 (compared to a ratio of roughly 6 in 1983). This means that over the last thirty years, earnings at the ends of the income distribution have grown stronger than earnings in the middle. Therefore, Figure 22 shows that income polarisation – much discussed in the US and Europe – is taking place in Germany as well.

Figure 21. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time




Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–60. Individuals are considered in work if they worked at least 52 hours in the year preceding the survey and received earnings either from labour income or from self-employment. Hence, both employees and self- employed workers are represented. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 22 shows growth in gross individual earnings across the distribution. It shows similar trends to Figure 13, which plots the change in hourly wages over the same periods. The period from 1983 to 1990 was characterised by inclusive growth in individual earnings along the income distribution. However, for women at the bottom of the earnings distribution, we do not observe earnings growth, reflecting the decline in hours worked by female employees (Figure 16). In the period from 1991 to 2007 especially male (but also female) individuals at the bottom of the distribution experienced losses in their incomes in real terms. Only individuals in the top 10 percentiles were able to realise small gains in earnings. In recent years, individuals in Germany have again been able to achieve larger increases in individual earnings. For women, earnings at the bottom of the distribution rose even more strongly than hourly wages between 2007 and 2019.

Figure 23 shows that including employer social security contributions makes little difference compared to gross individual earnings, when calculating growth incidence curves for different time periods.



Figure 22. Annualised growth in gross earnings by earnings percentile, overall and sex, selected periods



















Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–60. Individuals are considered in work if they worked at least 52 hours in the year preceding the survey and received earnings either from labour income or from self-employment. Hence, both employees and self- employed workers are represented. 1983 to 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 23. Annualised growth in gross earnings and employer cost by earnings percentile, selected periods





















Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–60. Individuals are considered in work if they worked at least 52 hours in the year preceding the survey and received earnings either from labour income or from self-employment. Hence, both employees and self- employed workers are represented. To obtain the employer cost series, a moving average of employers' social security contributions was calculated over several observations in order to reduce fluctuations in the series due to observations with zero social s ecurity contributions. 1983 to 1990: West Germany only.

4.5 Self-employment

Figure 24 shows that the share of employees has been steadily increasing from 67% in 1984 to 80% in 2019 (left-hand axis). The share of self-employed is low in Germany and fluctuated around 7% during this period (right-hand axis). Solo self-employment as well as the overall share of self-employed workers have fallen in more recent years and the COVID pandemic has further accelerated this trend. This picture is also evident in the official statistics. At 2.5%, the number of self-employed persons declined more substantially than the number of employees in 2020 (Statistisches Bundesamt, 2024b).

Comparing the share of self-employed workers across sex and educational attainment, as shown in Figure 25, one can see that self-employment is more common among men and highly educated individuals. Across the income distribution we find the highest share of self-employed workers among top earners (Figure 26). However, the bottom part of the distribution also contains more self-employed workers than the middle layers. Figure 26 also yields insights with respect to the development of self-employment over time along the income distribution: the share of self-employed workers in the bottom distribution declined slightly from 1985 to 2017.

Figure 24. Share of employees and self-employed workers, over time
100	15

80
10
60

40
5
20

0	0


Year



Note: Individuals 25–60 years of age. Workers are defined as self-employed if they receive more income from self-employment than they do from employment. Employees are individuals in the specified age range who worked at least 52 hours in the year preceding the survey and receiving labour earnings. The share of employees and self-employed is calculated as a fraction of individuals with information on the employment status. The time series for ‘solo self-employed’ and ‘other self-employed’ are not based on income information, in contrast to the overall self-employment calculation. Instead, additional information on occupational position in the survey year is used, where respondents could indicate self-employment and were asked about the number of employees. The



division into ‘solo self-employed’ and ‘other self-employed’ is made on these grounds. This is the reason for the different time periods covered. Because of this the shares might not add up to the total number of self-employed people. The ‘solo self-employed’ relate to self-employed workers without employees. ‘Other self-employed’ include self-employed with employees and family workers. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 25. Share self-employed by sex and education, over time
20


15


10


5


0


Year


Note: Individuals 25–60 years of age. Workers are defined as self-employed if they receive more income from self-employment than they do from employment. The share of self-employed is calculated as a fraction of individuals. Until 1990: West Germany only.

40



30



20



10



0


Earnings percentile


Note: Individuals 25–60 years of age with positive earnings. Workers are defined as self-employed if they receive more income from self-employment than they do from employment. The share of self-employed is calculated as a fraction of individuals. Five-year averages have been calculated and smoothing across five percentile points has been applied. Until 1990: West Germany only.


5. Institutions
This section looks at labour market institutions that affect earnings and incomes: the tax- and transfer system, minimum wages and collective bargaining, and social insurance. As in most of the report, the analysis is restricted to workers, employees or individuals aged 25–60.

5.1 Minimum wage and unions

In Germany, a mandatory minimum wage was only introduced in 2015, bringing in an hourly rate of at least
€8.50.5 Since then, the bite of the minimum wage and the share of workers earning below 120% of the minimum wage has fallen slightly, as shown in Figure 27. The level, as a share of median net wages, is rather high at more than 50%, but decreased slightly over the period 2015–2020. Until 2021, minimum wage increases were determined by a joint commission of union and employer representatives and economists. In 2022, the government deviated from this policy and decided to unilaterally increase the minimum wage from €10.45 to
€12.00 per hour, which so far constitutes the highest increase of 14.8%. Therefore, the bite of the minimum wage is expected to increase substantially in the coming years.


































5 However, for a transitional period until the end of 2017, industry minimum wages were still allowed to be lower than the general minimum wage.

30	0.8

20	0.6


10	0.4


0	0.2


Year



Note: Labour costs taken from the German Federal Statistics Agency. Labour costs include compensation of employees with gross earnings in the form of cash and non-cash benefits and employers' social security contributions, the cost of vocational training and continuing education, other training, other expenses and taxes on the total payroll or number of employees. Individuals aged 25–
60. The minimum wage used is the minimum wage for over-25s. The figure presents the share of workers with a wage below 1.2 times the minimum wage (left-hand axis) as well as the ratio of the minimum wage to the median wage for the net wage and the average labour cost (right-hand axis). Periods in which the minimum wage was at a given value do not exactly correspond to financial years, so in this figure ‘1999’ on the horizontal axis corresponds to ‘1 January 1999’, and each datapoint is plotted at the midpoint of the period to which it corresponds.
Source: Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis) 2023; authors’ calculations using data from the SOEP.

Figure 28 shows union density for all employees in Germany. OECD numbers are available from 1960 onwards, whereas for more recent years we also observe (self-reported) union density in the SOEP household survey. Collective bargaining is still the norm in many sectors of the Germany economy, with the majority of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements. However, this share has been steadily declining from 85% in the 1980s to roughly 55% in the years before the COVID pandemic.



Figure 28. Union density and fraction of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements, over time
100

80

60

40

20

0


Year



Note: The sample for the OECD series is all employees, and the sample for the SOEP series is individuals aged 25–64. The sample for collective contract coverage is individuals aged 25–60. Until 1990: West Germany only. In both cases the denominator is the number of employees.
Source: OECD 2023; authors’ calculations using data from the SOEP.

5.2 Tax and benefits (financial transfers from the state)

Figure 29 shows public (financial) transfers received as a share of total (gross) income from 1984 to 2020 across quartiles of the net income distribution. The transfers comprise unemployment benefits, short-time work allowance6, social assistance and citizen’s benefit (unemployment benefits II for the period considered), child benefits, parental benefits, educational benefits as well as pension income from the statutory pension insurance system. As expected, the largest benefit income ratio is found for the first quartile for all years. This quartile should comprise most of the (long-term) unemployed who receive unemployment benefits, citizen’s benefits or social assistance, while receiving little or no labour earnings. While the benefit income ratio decreased slightly for all quartiles and differences between the quartiles were rather stable in the second half of the 1980s, German reunification seems to have been a turning point. In 1991 the ratios in the first and second quartiles jump up by about four percentage points, which can mainly be attributed to the population increase due to the reunification. In the following years, the German economy struggled with high unemployment rates, which is probably the main reason for the increasing benefit income ratio in the first quartile up to 2005, where it culminates at 33,8%. After the last Hartz reforms in 2005 the ratios decreased nearly constantly until recent years, interrupted only by the Global Financial Crisis in 2009 and the period of high immigration around 2015. In 2020, it is notable that the share of benefits increased for all quartiles except for the first quartile. This is a particular finding since the literature shows a cushioning or even positive effect of discretionary policy measures on disposable income for the bottom of the income distribution during the pandemic in Germany (e.g., Clark et al. 2021; Christl et al. 2023). It should be noted at this point that the surveys in 2020/21 are likely driven by special Covid effects. On the one hand, this includes genuine effects such as higher transfer payments; on the other hand, special effects may occur in the sample selection or due to a different survey date. We suspect a relevant change in the composition of the quartiles behind the deviating effects in quartile 1 and the other quartiles. The significance of the development at the current margin (2020) should therefore be treated with caution.


























6 In as far as survey respondents did not miss-characterise it as part of their labour earnings.



Figure 29. Benefits as a proportion of overall income, across quartiles of the equivalised disposable income distribution
50


40


30


20


10


0


Year



Note: The sample includes individuals aged 25–60. Income and benefits are aggregated at the household level. Overall income includes gross labour earnings, asset income, income from private transfers, private retirement income and public benefits. Public benefits include all public transfers as well as income from social security pensions. Disposable income is overall income net of direct taxes and employee social security contributions and is equivalised according to the modified OECD equivalence scale. Benefits and income amounts are calculated as the mean in the respective quartile of the equivalised disposable income distribution. Until 1990: West Germany only.
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from SOEP.


Due to the progressive income tax scheme in Germany, households at the upper end of the income distribution face higher tax burdens, as can be seen in Figure 30. In 2019, the burden of direct taxes, mainly income taxes on labour and capital income, plus social security contributions, was equal to 35.5% for the fourth, 31.5% for the third, 27.3% for the second and 18.5% for the first quartile. From 1984 to 2019 the tax burden increased the most in absolute terms for the third quartile, by about 4 percentage points. In more recent years, the tax burden on the first quartile has been growing faster than for the other quartiles. Social security contributions do not contribute to the progressive nature of the tax burden as payments increase linearly with income up to the contribution assessment ceiling.

Figure 30. Direct taxes and employee social security contributions as a proportion of overall income, across quartiles of the equivalised disposable income distribution
50


40


30


20


10


0


Year



Note: The sample includes individuals aged 25–60. Income and benefits are aggregated at the household level. Overall income includes gross labour earnings, asset income, income from private transfers, private retirement income and public benefits. Public benefits include all public transfers as well as income from social security pensions. Disposable income is overall income net of direct taxes and employee social security contributions and is equivalised according to the modified OECD equivalence scale. Benefits and income amounts are calculated as the mean in the respective quartile of the equivalised disposable income distribution. Until 1990: West Germany only.
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from SOEP.


Bringing the tax elements and benefit elements together, Figure 31 shows the total disposable household income, including benefits and net of taxes and social security contributions, as a share of total gross income along the income distribution. On average, the households in the first quartile of the income distribution receive the highest net gross income share. As seen in the previous two charts, households in the first quartile have a high benefit–income ratio and pay a lower share of their gross income as taxes and social security contributions than other quartiles, which eventually translates into a higher net gross income ratio. From 1984 to 2019, the ratio decreased slightly for the upper three quartiles and increased for the first quartile.
By adding the employers’ social security contributions to overall income, the proportion of disposable to gross income becomes lower for all quartiles, as Figure 32 shows. For the lower three quartiles, the net- gross share is around 10% lower compared to the ratio without employers' social security contributions. The difference in the net-gross shares is slightly lower for the upper quartile at approx. 6%, as no social security contributions are due for income above the income threshold and the upper quartile contains a disproportionately high number of self-employed persons who do not pay employer social security contributions.



Figure 31. Disposable income as a proportion to overall income, across quartiles of the equivalised disposable income distribution
100


90


80


70


60


50


Year



Note: The sample includes individuals aged 25–60. Income and benefits are aggregated at the household level. Overall income includes gross labour earnings, asset income, income from private transfers, private retirement income and public benefits. Public benefits include all public transfers as well as income from social security pensions. Disposable income is overall income net of direct taxes and employee social security contributions and is equivalised according to the modified OECD equivalence scale. Benefits and income amounts are calculated as the mean in the respective quartile of the equivalised disposable income distribution. Until 1990: West Germany only.
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from SOEP.

Figure 32. Disposable income as a proportion to overall income including employer social security contributions, across quartiles of the disposable income distribution
100


90


80


70


60


50


Year



Note: The sample includes individuals aged 25–60. Income and benefits are aggregated at the household level. Overall income includes gross labour earnings, asset income, income from private transfers, private retirement income and public benefits. Public benefits include all public transfers as well as income from social security pensions. Disposable income is overall income net of direct taxes and employee social security contributions and is equivalised according to the modified OECD equivalence scale. Em ployer social security contributions are simulated with the ifo microsimulation model (Blömer & Peichl, 2020). Benefits and income amounts are calculated as the mean in the respective quartile of the equivalised disposable income distribution. Until 1990: West Germany only.
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from SOEP, simulations from ifo microsimulation model.


6. Household incomes
This section looks at trends in household incomes. We start by looking at trends in household composition and the degree of assortative matching, which partly determine household earnings. We then compare trends in household earnings and household disposable income for working households, drawing out the role of the tax and transfer system over time. Finally, we show a set of charts on trends in household income inequality across all households (including those where no one is in work).

6.1 Trends in household composition
As in most industrialised economies, rates of marriage and cohabitation in Germany have fallen in recent decades. This decline has been strongest among individuals with low levels of formal schooling, whereas marriage and cohabitation rates among graduates (ISCED 6–8) have decreased less. In consequence, Figure 33 provides evidence for increased assortative matching, meaning that graduates are increasingly likely to marry other graduates.

The COVID pandemic appears to have further exacerbated the negative trend in marriage and cohabitation rates. The proportion in 2020 is roughly 3 percentage points below the 2019 figure, regardless of the education level. Statistics from the Federal Statistical Office (2022) show that the number of marriages in Germany also fell sharply by over 10.3% and 4.2% in 2020 and 2021 respectively.

Figure 33. Share married/cohabiting, overall and by education, over time
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 34 shows a similar pattern when looking at individual earnings, rather than education. For men, the positive correlation between individual earnings and the probability of being in a couple has become stronger over time. For women, this relationship was negative in 1984 (high-earning women were less likely to be a couple), whereas in 2019 the correlation was essentially zero. In particular, high-earning individuals are now more likely than before to have a partner who works.

Figure 34. Share married/cohabiting and share with working partner, by sex and individual gross earnings percentile, selected years


1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

1984, Males



1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

1984, Females



Earnings percentile	Earnings percentile




1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

1994, Males



1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

1994, Females



Earnings percentile	Earnings percentile




1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

2019, Males



1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

2019, Females



Earnings percentile	Earnings percentile


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Married/cohabitating also includes civil partnerships. The proportion with a working partner is conditional on being married/cohabiting. Smoothing across five percentile points has been applied. 1984: West Germany only.



Finally, for couples in which both partners work, the correlation between the gross earnings percentile of an individual and the partner’s position in the gross earnings distribution has changed markedly over the years, as shown in Figure 35. For women, the U-shaped pattern of the 1980s and 1990s has changed into a more linear relationship. For men, the correlation has grown stronger, pushing up inequality in household earnings.

Figure 35. Mean gross earnings percentile of partner/spouse by individual’s gross earnings percentile,
selected years

Female
80
70
60
50
40
30

Male
80
70
60
50
40
30



Female earnings percentile	Male earnings percentile



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Married/cohabitating also includes civil partnerships. Mean earnings of partners are plotted as five-point moving averages across the earnings distribution. Smoothing across five percentile points has been applied. 1984–86: West Germany only.

Looking at family structure more broadly (Figure 36), the share of prime working-age adults who are single increased from 14% in 1983 to 25% in 2019. There are both more single parents and more singles without children in 2019 than in 1983. Moreover, there has been a shift away from children within the group of coupled households. The share of couples with children decreased from 35% in 1983 to 27% in 2019 while the share of couples without children increased from 23% to 27%.

Figure 37 again shows the rise in the share of single households over time, separately for male and female individuals. For women, the increase in the share of single mothers with lower levels of formal education after the turn of the millennium is substantial. For men with similar education levels the share of childless singles increased most markedly over the same period. The only group that does not exhibit an increase in singlehood are highly educated women. Especially with the inclusion of the East German sample and in the first half of the 1990s, the share of singles decreases in this group. In line with the further decline in marriage and cohabitation rates during the pandemic (see Figure 33), the proportion of people in single households also continues to rise in 2020, particularly among individuals with a low level of education (ISCED 0–2) as well as for men with high education levels (ISCED 6–8). Finally, men of all education levels are more likely to still be living with their parents while of prime working age.

Figure 36. Share of individuals by position in the household, over time
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


Year

Other
Adult child
Couple, children
Couple, no children
Single, children
Single, no children

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Missing values have been excluded as they lead to inconsistencies in 1991, the year of German reunification. ‘Single, children’ and ‘couple, children’ refer to dependent children only. Parents of adult children are categorised as ‘other’. Until 1990: West Germany only.



Figure 37. Share of individuals by position in the household, by sex and education, over time


100
80
60
40
20
0

Women ISCED 0–2





100
80
60
40
20
0

Men ISCED 0–2





Year	Year




100
80
60
40
20
0

Women ISCED 3–5






100
80
60
40
20
0

Men ISCED 3–5










100
80
60
40
20
0

Year

Women ISCED 6–8







100
80
60
40
20
0

Year

Men ISCED 6–8





Year	Year



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Missing values have been excluded as they lead to inconsistencies in 1991, the year of German reunification. ‘Single, children’ and ‘couple, children’ refer to dependent children only. Parents of adult children are categorised as ‘other’. Until 1990: West Germany only.

6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households

As illustrated by

Figure 38, the share of individuals in working households has been relatively stable over time among graduates and medium-skilled workers, despite rising levels of employment since the mid-1990s. However, the increasing labour force participation of women has been accompanied by a structural shift from the traditional single-earner household to multi-earner households. Thus, the increase in women's labour force participation has not led to an increase in working households to the same extent. In addition, the share of single-income households has increased significantly since the mid-1990s, while the prevalence of single-income couples has continued to decline. Comparing 2019 to 1993, there has been a decline in the share of those with no or low-level qualifications living in a working household (from 88% to 80%), though part of this is likely to reflect the fact that this group is increasingly negatively selected.

The sharp decline in 2020, particularly among individuals with a low level of education, is likely to somewhat exaggerate the actual developments, as the decline in employment in the SOEP data in 2020 is also somewhat sharper than in the official data from the Federal Statistical Office. However, according to the Federal Employment Agency (Bundesagentur für Arbeit, 2024b), the number of people in marginal employment (e.g. low-income earners such as mini-jobbers) also fell by more than 7% year-on- year in 2020.

Figure 38. Share of individuals in a working household, overall and by education, over time
100


90




80




70


Year



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Missing values have been excluded. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. Until 1990: West Germany only.

We now consider how all the trends above combined explain trends in household earnings, and how interactions with the tax and benefit system generate trends in disposable household income. Figure 39 shows gross household earnings and disposable household income in real terms over time. In contrast to real median wages, equivalised median gross household income increased substantially from €25,000 in 1983 to €36,000 in 2019 for working households. This difference arises due to changes in household



composition (affecting the equivalisation weights) and due to the steady increase in employment among women. Disposable household income for working households increased over time, too. However, the increase in disposable income was more moderate as changes in the tax and benefit system and bracket creep have increasingly raised tax duties over time.

Non-working households saw a moderate increase in disposable household income up to 1999, and a slow decline afterwards. This decline in real income was partially driven by bracket creep, as nominal transfer payments remained constant in many years despite inflation. Furthermore, the trend reflects a compositional shift towards a higher share of long-term rather than short-term unemployed (compare Figure 7). Because the long-term unemployed receive lower transfer payments especially since the Hartz reforms, a higher share of long-term unemployed decreases average disposable household incomes in the group of non-working households.

Figure 39. Median real gross household earnings and disposable household income among working households, over time
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0


Year



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60 in working and non-working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Households with missing equivalised gross household earnings or disposable household incomes have been dropped. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 40 shows that the tax and benefits system in Germany dampened the impact of rising earnings inequality on disposable income inequality among working households in the period between 1991 and 2007, where gross household income fell substantially at the bottom of the distribution. The profile for disposable household incomes was relatively flat and the decline in disposable income at the bottom of the distribution was much smaller.
The period from 1984 to 1990 was characterised by inclusive growth both for gross household earnings and disposable household earnings. Between 2007 and 2019 gross household earnings and disposable household earnings grew at about the same rate across the distribution, except for the bottom of the distribution, where disposable household earnings showed lower growth rates. At these income percentiles, a high share of income originates from transfers, largely decoupling the gross and disposable income distribution. Furthermore, the Hartz reforms have brought about redistributions from transfer recipients to working households by reducing transfers and increasing the incentives to work in the low-

wage sector. Thus, currently available evidence suggests that they have decreased earnings inequality (at least in the overall population) but increased inequality in disposable household income (Battisti, Felbermayr and Lehwald, 2016; Hartung, Jung and Kuhn, 2022; Immel, 2021).


Figure 40. Annualised growth in real gross household earnings and household disposable income for working households, by percentile, selected years

1984–1990
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6

1991–2007
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6



Percentile

2007–2019
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6

Percentile



Percentile

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60 in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Household disposable income and household gross earnings have been smoothed across five percentile points. Households with missing disposable household incomes or gross household earnings have been dropped due to inconsistencies in 1991, the year of German reunification. Until 1990: West Germany only.

6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households

This section brings together the trends shown above to look at inequality in disposable household incomes across all households.

Figure 41 shows growing dispersion in real median disposable household incomes. Whereas incomes grew for graduates (ISCED 6–8) and those with medium-level qualifications (ISCED 3–5), incomes stagnated for lower-educated groups (ISCED 0–2).



Figure 41. Median real disposable household income for all households, overall and by education, over time

35


30


25


20


15


10


Year



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Incomes are in 2020 prices. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figures 42 and 43 show that measures of inequality in disposable household incomes were relatively stable in the 1980s, 1990s and after 2010, but grew markedly in the 2000s. Figure 42 documents that the Gini coefficient and the share of relative poverty (individuals with less than 60% of median income) increased especially between 1999 and 2005. In parallel, the income shares of the top 1% increased slowly but steadily throughout the observation period in our data. The SOEP household data are known to be not fully representative of the top of the income distribution, which means we are hesitant to draw strong conclusions from these statistics. Reassuringly, Bartels (2019) shows an increase of the top 1% income share from 1984 to 2014 also in the administrative tax data, complementing our findings in the SOEP. Furthermore, the Gini coefficient looks very similar when winsorising incomes at the 99th percentile. At the same time, the level of inequality as measured by the top 1% income share is of course higher in the tax data.

Figure 43 displays the 90:10, 50:10 and 90:50 ratios of disposable household incomes. Overall, the 90:10 and 50:10 ratios increased substantially whereas the 90:50 ratio did not change much. This provides clear evidence that the increase in inequality in disposable household incomes was mainly a result of low- income earners falling behind, whereas the income gap between top-income and middle-income earners remained rather stable.

Figure 42. Gini, relative poverty and top 1% share of net household income for all households, over time
0.35	30



0.30
20

0.25

10
0.20



0.15	0


Year



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. The inequality measures are based on incomes net of taxes and benefits. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with less than 60% of contemporaneous median income. All inc omes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. For the winsorised Gini coefficient, we allocate all observations above the 99th percentile the amount equal to the 99th percentile. Disposable household income does not contain negative values. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 43. Percentile ratios of disposable household incomes for all households, over time
4


3.5


3


2.5


2


1.5


Year





Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. The inequality measures are based on incomes net of taxes and benefits. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Until 1990: West Germany only.

7. Inequality between migrants and natives
Finally, we consider migration patterns. Germany is mostly a country of immigration. From 1984 to 2019, the share of immigrants in the adult population increased substantially, as shown in Figure 44.7 This increase was entirely driven by immigration from outside Europe. For example, a substantial part of the biggest increase around 2015 coincides to the war in Syria and the following migration movements.

Most of these immigrants are today at the bottom of the income distribution, as depicted in Figure 45. In 2017, the share of immigrants at the bottom of the income distribution was 30%, compared to 10% at the top. This gap, now 20 percentage points, was substantially smaller in the 1980s and 1990s. Via this channel, immigration has been (at least in the short term) a factor pushing towards higher earnings inequality in Germany.

Figure 46 displays further outcomes of immigrants relative to natives. The gaps in hours worked and employment are smaller than for earnings, but still visible. For example, immigrants worked 5-10% fewer hours in 2019 than natives, and female immigrants in particular were less likely to be employed. Furthermore, immigrants possess lower levels of formal education. This is especially true for men. Interestingly, the education gap was especially large in 1992 and has been shrinking since then. However, we are careful in interpreting these findings, as it is often not clear how to best translate educational qualifications of immigrants into the ISCED scale.

Figure 44. Share of immigrants in the population aged 25–60, 1983–2021
20



15



10



5



0


Year



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Until 1990: West Germany only.





7 The SOEP numbers will differ in some years from administrative sources due to the incorporation of new samples over time. Nevertheless, the broad trend of increasing non-European immigration as reflected here is also found in administrative data.



Figure 45. Share of immigrants in the population, across the disposable income distribution, 25–60 years of age, 1985, 1991, 2007 and 2017
40



30



20



10



0


Percentile



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Incomes are in 2020 prices. Disposable household incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Five-year averages have been calculated and smoothing across five percentile points has been applied. Until 1990: West Germany only.

Figure 46. Outcomes for migrants relative to natives, ages 25–60, 1984, 1992, 2007, 2019


100


80


60


40


20


0
Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male	Gross Disp.

Share high educated

Hours per week

Household income

Employment rate	Personal earnings


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Incomes are in 2020 prices. Disposable household incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Output of natives have been normalised to 1. Earnings (of those at work) and incomes are ratios of medians. 1984: West Germany only.


8. References
Bartels, C., 2019. Top Incomes in Germany, 1871–2014. Journal of Economic History, 79(3), 669–707.
Battisti, M., Felbermayr, G. and Lehwald, S., 2016. Inequality in Germany: Myths, facts, and policy implications. ifo Working Paper No. 217.
Biewen, M., Ungerer, M. and Löffler, M., 2019. Why did income inequality in Germany not increase further after 2005? German Economic Review, 20(4), 471–504.
Blömer, M. and Peichl, A., 2020. The ifo tax and transfer behavioral microsimulation model. ifo Working Paper No. 335.
Blömer, M., Fuest, C. and Peichl, A., 2019. Die Hartz-IV-Reformdebatte. ifo Schnelldienst, 72(6), 21–5. Börschlein, E.-B., Bossler, M., Fitzenberger, B., & Popp, M., 2023. Mit der Erhöhung auf 12 Euro liegt die
Entwicklung des gesetzlichen Mindestlohns über der Tariflohn- und Preisentwicklung. IAB- Forum: Das Magazin des Instituts für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung: https://www.iab-forum.de/mit-der-erhoehung-auf-12-euro-liegt-die-entwicklung-des- gesetzlichen-mindestlohns-ueber-der-tariflohn-und-preisentwicklung/
Bundesagentur für Arbeit, 2024a. Arbeitslosigkeit und Unterbeschäftigung. https://statistik.arbeitsagentur.de/DE/Navigation/Statistiken/Fachstatistiken/Arbeitsuche- Arbeitslosigkeit-Unterbeschaeftigung/Aktuelle-Eckwerte-Nav.html
Bundesagentur für Arbeit, 2024b. Eckwerte Arbeitsmarkt - Beschäftigung. https://statistik.arbeitsagentur.de/DE/Navigation/Statistiken/Interaktive-Statistiken/Eckwerte- Arbeitsmarkt/Dashboard-Eckwerte-Arbeitsmarkt-Nav.html
Bundesagentur für Arbeit, 2024c. Kurzarbeit. https://statistik.arbeitsagentur.de/DE/Navigation/Statistiken/Interaktive- Statistiken/Kurzarbeitergeld/Kurzarbeitergeld-Nav.html
Bruckmeier, K., Mühlhan, J. and Wiemers, J., 2018. Erwerbstätige im unteren Einkommensbereich stärken: Ansätze zur Reform von Arbeitslosengeld II, Wohngeld und Kinderzuschlag. IAB- Forschungsbericht No. 9/2018.
Christl, M., De Poli, S., Hufkens, T., Peichl, A., & Ricci, M., 2023. The role of short-time work and discretionary policy measures in mitigating the effects of the COVID-19 crisis in Germany. International Tax and Public Finance, 30, 1107–36.
Clark, A. E., d’Ambrosio, C., & Lepinteur, A. (2021). The fall in income inequality during COVID-19 in four European countries. The Journal of Economic Inequality, 19, 489-507.
Drechsel-Grau, M., Peichl, A., Schmid, K., Schmieder, J., Walz, H. and Wolter, S., 2022. Inequality and income dynamics in Germany. Quantitative Economics, 13(4), 1593–635.
Goebel, J., Grabka, M. M., Liebig, S., Kroh, M., Richter, D., Schröder, C. and Schupp, J., 2019. The German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP). Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, 239(2), 345–60.
Grabka, M. M., 2022. SOEP-Core v37: Codebook for the $PEQUIV File 1984-2020: CNF Variables with Extended Income Information for the SOEP. Berlin: DIW/SOEP.
Grabka, M. M., 2024. Niedriglohnsektor in Deutschland schrumpft seit 2017. DIW Wochenbericht,
2024(5). doi: https://doi.org/10.18723/diw_wb:2024-5-1

Hartung, B., Jung, P., & Kuhn, M., 2022. Unemployment insurance reforms and labour market dynamics.
Mimeo. https://www.wiwi.uni- bonn.de/kuhn/paper/Unemployment_Insurance_and_Separation_Rates.pdf
Immel, L., 2021. The impact of labor market reforms on income inequality: Evidence from the German Hartz reforms. ifo Working Paper No. 347.
OECD, 2023. OECD/AIAS database. https://www.oecd.org/employment/ictwss-database.htm
Schmidt, T., Holtemöller, O., Kooths, S., Michelsen, C., & Wollmershäuser, T., 2021. Pandemie verzögert Aufschwung - Demografie bremst Wachstum. Gemeinschaftsdiagnose Frühjahr 2021. Essen: Projektgruppe Gemeinschaftsdiagnose.
Schröder, C., Grabka, M. M., Handrich, L., König, J., Morales, O., Priem, M., . . . Winkler, A., 2023.
Sonderauswertungen des Sozioökonomischen Panels (SOEP) 2020 und 2021 zu Löhnen und Arbeitszeiten in der Pandemie. Berlin: Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung Berlin e.V.
Socio-Economic Panel, 2023. SOEP-Core v38.1eu (Data 1984-2021, EU-Edition). doi:10.5684/soep.core.v38ir
Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis), 2022. Tiefststand bei Eheschließungen und Hoch bei Geburten im Jahr 2021: Pressemitteilung Nr. 181 vom 28. April 2022. https://www.destatis.de/DE/Presse/Pressemitteilungen/2022/04/PD22_181_126.html
Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis), 2023. Eine Arbeitsstunde kostete im Jahr 2022 im Schnitt 39,50 Euro: Pressemitteilung Nr. 164 vom 26. April 2023. https://www.destatis.de/DE/Presse/Pressemitteilungen/2023/04/PD23_164_624.html
Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis), 2024a. Statistischer Bericht - Verbraucherpreisindex für Deutschland
- Lange Reihen ab 1948. https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Wirtschaft/Preise/Verbraucherpreisindex/
Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis), 2024b. Volkswirtschaftliche Gesamtrechnungen - Fachserie 18 Reihe 1.2.
https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Wirtschaft/Volkswirtschaftliche-Gesamtrechnungen- Inlandsprodukt/inhalt.html
Walwei, U., Eichhorst, W., Rinne, U., Blömer, M., Fuest, C. and Peichl, A., 2019. Hartz IV - Reform einer umstrittenen politischen Maßnahme? Wirtschaftsdienst, 99(4), 235–55.


9. Data appendix
This Appendix describes in more detail the data sources underlying the figures in this report. While in some graphs aggregate data from the German statistical office or the OECD have been added, all microdata data used in this paper originate from the latest version (v38.1) of the German Socio-Economic Panel (Socio-Economic Panel, 2023).
Established in 1984, the SOEP is a nationally representative household panel survey of the German population. In the years before the outbreak of the COVID pandemic, it annually samples around 15,000 German households or 25,000 individuals each year (Goebel et al., 2019). The SOEP is a multidisciplinary survey as it provides a broad range of socioeconomic variables such as income, education, employment status and biographical characteristics as well as subjective measures such as life satisfaction or views on fairness.

The target population covered in the SOEP is defined as the population of private households residing within the current boundaries of the Federal Republic of Germany. Because of changes in these boundaries (in 1990) and changes in the population due to migration, various adaptations have been made to the initial sampling structure to maintain the representativity of the sample. The SOEP was expanded to the territory of the German Democratic Republic in June 1990, only six months after the fall of the Berlin Wall. However, we decided to include households from Eastern Germany only from 1991 onwards in our data, because due to the reunification there were some issues with income measurement in 1990. For this reason, several time series graphs, e.g., in median wages, display a discrete jump in 1991, representing the new sample composition due to the German reunification. In all figures, we use the cross-sectional sampling weights at the individual level to ensure that our statistics are representative of the entire German population.
To compute wage and income statistics, it would generally be possible to additionally rely on the German administrative tax return data or the social security data of the Institut für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung (IAB) of the German labour agency. However, both data sets are not representative for the entire population. While the administrative IAB data are of very high quality and provide complete coverage of all jobs in Germany that are subject to social security contributions, the income variable is top-coded at the social security contribution limit. This means that there is no information on incomes for men above around the 90th percentile, and for women above the 96th percentile. The German tax data are based on individual and household tax returns and have no top-coding. However, the nature of tax returns in Germany is such that many low-income workers do not file a return and thus are not covered in the tax data. Drechsel-Grau et al. (2022) combine tax and social security to provide a comprehensive account of the recent evolution of the German income distribution. However, as these data lack important demographic characteristics that have been of interest in this report and are only available for the last two decades, we decided to base our entire analysis on the SOEP.
As with most survey data, the main limitation of the SOEP is imperfect coverage of the top of the income distribution. As this report provides few figures that are sensitive to inequality at the top (e.g., percentile ratios to measure inequality), this limitation is not very relevant in our context. While most information in the SOEP is provided for the current month or situation, income figures refer to the last year. This means that we observe income variables from 1983 to 2020, whereas most other statistics are available for the time period from 1984 until 2021.
However, the results for the 2021 survey wave and the corresponding 2020 income data are subject to greater uncertainty for a number of reasons. On the one hand, the number of observations in the SOEP declined significantly in its recent wave from around 16,000 individuals aged between 25 and 60 per wave to around 12,500 adult respondents. Due to the pandemic-related contact restrictions, the data collection could not be carried out as usual. In many cases, interviews had to be conducted via telephone instead of face-to-face interviews (Grabka M. M., 2024). In addition to the corona-related difficulties in data

collection, there was a change in the survey institute in 2021, which has been associated with the lower willingness of SOEP respondents to participate in the survey (Schröder, et al., 2023). On the other hand, analyses suggest that the standard questions in the SOEP do not adequately capture the extent and (distributional) effects of short-time work in Germany in terms of hours worked, earnings and related variables (Schröder, et al., 2023). In 2020, the SOEP was not yet able to collect any explicit information on the use of short-time work. A survey on the use of short-time work could only be carried out retrospectively with the survey in 2021. Chapter 3. Notes on measurement and definitions contains more detailed information on each variable.


10. Appendix: additional charts
Figure 47. Annualised growth in hourly wages among employees by wage percentile, overall and by sex, selected periods

1983–1990
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6

1991–2007
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6


Percentile	Percentile


2007–2019
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6

Percentile



Note: Sample is employees aged 25–74. The sample does not include individuals with earnings from self-employment. Individuals with both earnings from employment and self-employment are also excluded from the analysis, leaving only employees’ hourly wages. Until 1990: West Germany only.

and by sex, selected years
1983–1985 to 1988–1990
4	4
3	3
2	2
1	1
0	0
-1	-1
-2	-2
-3	-3
-4	-4
5	10	15	20
Hourly wage ventile


1991–1993 to 2005–2007


5	10	15	20
Hourly wage ventile


	
2005–2007 to 2017–2019
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
5	10	15	20
Hourly wage ventile



Note: Sample is employees aged 25–74. The sample does not include individuals with earnings from self-employment. Individuals with both earnings from employment and self-employment are also excluded from the analysis, leaving only hours worked by employees. Hours include paid (but not unpaid) overtime. Until 1990: West Germany only.



Figure 49. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time
0.45

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15


Year



Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–74. Individuals are considered in work if they worked at least 52 hours in the year preceding the survey and received earnings either from labour income or from self-employment. Hence, both employees and self- employed workers are represented. Until 1990: West Germany only.

1983–1990
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6

1991–2007
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6



Earnings percentile	Earnings percentile


2007–2019
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6


Earnings percentile



Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25–74. Individuals are considered in work if they worked at least 52 hours in the year preceding the survey and received earnings either from labour income or from self-employment. Hence, both employees and self- employed workers are represented. Until 1990: West Germany only.
































































































































































































































lnstitute for Fiscal Studies

Country Studies: Inequalities in Europe and North America
A parallel study to the IFS Deaton Review

Barra Roantree Michelle Barrett





Inequality in Ireland: 1987- 2019






















Inequality in Ireland: 1987–2019
Barra Roantree and Michelle Barrett
Contents
Inequality in Ireland: 1987–2019	1
1. Executive summary	2
2. Notes on measurement, definitions and institutions	4
3. Institutional background	6
4. Individual employment and earnings	8
4.1 Trends in employment	8
4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)	12
4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)	17
4.4 Inequality in individual earnings (employees only)	20
4.5 Self-employment	25
5. Labour market institutions	27
5.1 Minimum wage and unions	27
5.2 Benefits from the state	28
6. Household incomes	31
6.1 Trends in household composition	31
6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households	36
6.3 Inequality in incomes among all working-age households	37
7. References	40
























© Institute for Fiscal Studies	1

1. Executive summary
This report provides an in-depth analysis of wage, earnings and income trends and inequalities in Ireland over a three-decade period, spanning from 1987 to 2019. One of the significant findings of this research is the reduction in the gender employment gap. Specifically, the employment rates for women aged 25–64 have seen substantial growth, contributing to a narrowing of the gap between men and women. Furthermore, during the Great Recession, median hourly wages declined more for men than for women, resulting in a notable decrease in the raw gender wage gap from an average of 16.4% prior to 2010 to just 3.3% by 2019. Nevertheless, a gender pay gap in earnings endures at 17.7%, primarily driven by differences in working hours.
Education has played a pivotal role in this evolution. The data reveal a substantial increase in educational attainment, particularly in tertiary education. Notably, a sharp rise in tertiary education has been observed in both men and women. Gender differences in educational levels persist, with men having lower rates of tertiary education but narrowing disparities in upper- secondary education. Employment rates have fluctuated, particularly for those with tertiary education, with women's employment rates on the rise, while men, especially those without tertiary education, have faced more volatility and challenges, notably since the Great Recession.
Median hourly wages of employees increased between 1987 and 1994, remained stagnant during the 1990s, peaked in 2010, and then declined sharply during the Great Recession. Notably, the gender wage gap narrowed during this period, primarily due to a greater fall in male wages.
Additionally, the analysis demonstrates that while, conditional on education, wages are still below 2010 levels, the gender wage gap has decreased across all education groups, although it remains most significant in the lowest education category. Income inequality, as measured by the Gini coefficient and 50:10 wage ratio, has increased over the entire period, with differing trends for men and women. Overall, wage growth was stronger for women in the bottom three-quarters of the wage distribution, while for the top percentile men's wage growth was more pronounced.
We also consider inequality in the individual earnings of employees: the product of hourly wages and hours worked. Earnings patterns reveal initial growth, followed by stagnation in the mid- to late 1990s, a resurgence throughout the 2000s until the financial crisis, and a subsequent recovery. While men and women both experienced these trends, women encountered more stable and robust earnings growth. However, despite these gains, the gender earnings gap remains substantial, surpassing the gap in hourly wages, largely due to differences in hours worked, particularly pronounced among those without tertiary education. The earnings stagnation of less-educated workers contributed to persistent earnings inequality, with measures such as the Gini coefficient and percentile ratios showing a sustained rise in earnings inequality during the 2000s. Following the financial crisis, these inequality measures stabilised and even declined from 2015 as the labour market recovered.
Examining the impact of labour market institutions, this report delves into coverage of the minimum wage in Ireland which was introduced in 2000. The minimum wage has consistently remained at around half of gross median hourly earnings since its inception. However, the proportion of employees covered by this wage has fluctuated significantly, reaching its peak at 15.7% in 2007 after several incremental increases. Subsequently, the minimum wage experienced freezes, cuts and reversals, leading to coverage dropping to 10.5% in 2011. With the post-2012 labour market recovery, particularly for lower-paid workers, coverage rebounded to 17.3% by 2019. Additionally, there has been a decline in trade union membership and collective bargaining coverage, which aligns with broader international trends.
Ireland's tax, transfer and social welfare system has achieved significant redistribution at the household level. Cash benefits are most significant for the lowest net-income quartile, comprising 60% of gross household income on average. These benefits have fluctuated over time and increased for all quartiles after the Great Recession before falling with economic recovery. Tax payments, as a share of gross income, increased for higher income quartiles post-recession, offsetting earlier declines. The rise in average tax rates for the highest income quartile contributed to a drop in the disposable-to-gross income ratio.



Ireland, like many other countries, has experienced significant changes in family structures with implications for inequality. The percentage of the working-age population who are married or cohabiting has decreased. Education plays a substantial role, with a clear divide in marriage rates between different education groups. Higher-earning men are more likely to have working partners and higher-earning women have seen increased assortative matching. Household compositions have also shifted, with a notable increase in lone-parent households and couples without children. The rise in lone-parent households is concentrated among women, with the largest increase being among those with tertiary education. For men, the most striking change is the rise in the share of single adults, particularly among men without tertiary education.
The data reveal a strong association between education and the likelihood of being in a working household, with over 90% of those with tertiary education consistently in working households, while the share for those with lower-secondary or less education remains below 80%. Income levels are closely linked to household work status. However, the gap has narrowed over time, with the median disposable income for working households falling from twice that of non- working households to 1.6 times. The gap between gross earnings and net disposable income has decreased over time, with disposable income growth outpacing gross earnings growth, particularly at the bottom of the distribution. This was influenced by changes in government transfers and personal taxation.
Finally, the report examines income inequality across all households, accounting for working and non-working individuals. The findings reveal that income inequality has generally decreased over the years, particularly in the Gini coefficient, 90:10 and 50:10 percentile ratios. These trends suggest positive developments in reducing income disparities in Ireland, although further research may be necessary to understand the dynamics at the very top of the income distribution.
Our data do not cover the period of the COVID-19 pandemic due to data limitations and availability. However, work by Beirne et al. (2020) and Whelan et al. (2023) suggests that although the pandemic had a greater impact on lower-paid employees and employment in more disadvantaged areas, the scale of the policy response was sufficient to largely offset the initial effects of this on household income inequality. Roantree and Doorley (2023) point to more recent sluggish household income growth despite a strong labour market recovery which has contributed to a rise in household income inequality, raising questions whether the progressive and inclusive growth seen over the past few decades in Ireland will be sustained.

2. Notes on measurement, definitions and institutions
We draw on data from three household surveys covering the period 1987–2019. These have been the subject of extensive previous research, most recently by Roantree, Barrett and Redmond (2022), who use the data to explore household income growth, inequality and poverty over a three-decade span.

The Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services was carried out by the Survey Unit of the Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) in 1987, with the support of the European Commission and the Combat Poverty Agency (Callan et al., 1989). The Living in Ireland Survey was also carried out by the Survey Unit of the ESRI beginning in 1994, again with the support of the European Commission. In keeping with the European Community Household Panel, of which it was part, the survey adopted a longitudinal design, with household members followed up in subsequent waves of the survey. By Wave 7 (2000), attrition was deemed to be a cause of concern and the original sample of individuals still in scope of the survey (i.e., who had not died or moved to an institution or outside of the EU) were supplemented with a booster sample. To avoid any potential concerns about the representativeness of these later waves (Roantree et al., 2021), we use only Waves 1–6 of the Living in Ireland Survey spanning the years 1994–99. We use versions of this data held on a secure server at the ESRI, used previously by Nolan and Maître (2000) and Nolan (2003) among others.

We also use the Survey of Income and Living Conditions (SILC), an annual survey of households carried out by the Central Statistics Office since 2003 as part of the EU-SILC initiative aimed at collecting harmonised information on households for all countries in the EU. While similar in this respect to the Living in Ireland Survey, it is not primarily a longitudinal survey with most respondents sampled anew each year. We use the anonymised User Database version of the data provided by Eurostat covering the years 2003–19.

Unit of analysis and sample:
? For most of the analysis we restrict to those individuals aged 25–60, though for select charts we expand the age range to 16–74.
? All statistics are weighted using the survey-derived cross-sectional weights.
Definitions:
? Employment rate: the share of the population that report positive earnings from employment or self-employment in the prior 12 months, in addition to reporting being in paid work.
? Earnings: our measure of earnings includes employee cash or near cash income for employees, broadened to consider earnings from self-employment when we look at self- employment in Section 3.5 and household income in Section 5.
o All nominal values are converted into real terms using the Consumer Price Index with 2019 the base year.
o In some calculations, noted, we exclude workers in the top and bottom percentiles of the distribution to minimise the influence of outliers.
? Hours of work: self-reported usual hours worked per week, including paid overtime. Excludes self-employed workers.
? Hourly Wages: weekly equivalent of earnings from employment divided by usual hours worked per week. Excludes self-employed workers.
? Disposable household income (household equivalised income after deducting taxes and adding benefits and tax credits)
o Income includes earnings from employment, profit from self-employment, income from private pensions, investment income, income from educational grants and scholarships, cash welfare payments, and cash social insurance payments, net of taxes.
o Incomes are equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale, normalised to a single individual.









Splits:
o 
This definition broadly corresponds to that used by Eurostat for the purposes of SILC (Eurostat, 2018), with the primary differences being the exclusion of the imputed value of a company car (which is available only in SILC data from 2007 onwards) and net contributions to individual private pension plans, which represent deferred income and should be treated in a manner consistent with those to (predominantly public sector) defined benefit pension schemes.

? Sex: female, male
? Education: Education is split into three groups based on International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) classifications (ISCED 0–2, ISCED 3–5 and ISCED 6–8) which correspond to primary or lower; primary to upper-secondary; and post-upper- secondary education (including college degrees).
? Household type: Single without dependent children; single with dependent children; couples without dependent children; couples with dependent children; adult child; other. Parents of adult children go in the ‘other’ category. A dependent child is a child aged 0–17 or 18–24 and in full-time education, living with parents. The year 1987 is excluded as it is not possible to tell if the person aged 18–24 is living with a parent.
? Immigrant: we are unable to consistently categorise individuals according to their migration status so as a result do not include figures relating to this that are found in the other country reports.

3. Institutional background
In this subsection we briefly summarise some of the key institutional features of the Irish tax and welfare system.
Social insurance and Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI)
Ireland operates a system of social insurance similar to that of Britain, with the payment of compulsory Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI) contributions by most working-age individuals giving rise to an entitlement to certain ‘contributory’ social insurance payments, including (time- limited) jobseekers benefit and the State Pension (contributory).1 However, as in Britain, the generosity of these payments is very weakly related to earnings, with most paid at a flat rate.2 PRSI is paid at a main rate of 4% on income from employment and self-employment as well as (since 2014) on income from rents, investments, interest and dividends, with reduced rates payable at very low levels of income. PRSI is also paid (statutorily at least) by employers on the earnings of their employees, currently at a main rate of 11.05% with lower rates on the earnings of low-paid employees. Some public and civil servants hired before 1995 are also subject to reduced rates of PRSI and do not accrue entitlement to the State Pension (contributory).

Social assistance (means-tested transfers)
In addition to this system of social insurance, Ireland operates a system of means-tested social assistance payments. This includes jobseekers allowance for those out of work, Working Families Payment for parents in low-paid employment, and a State Pension (non-contributory) for retirees deemed to have an inadequate private or contributory State Pension.3 Most payments comprise a personal payment – for the claimant – and additional payments for any adult or child dependents, with the precise rates varying across payments. Similarly, although all these payments are means-tested (including an assessed value for capital assets, excluding principal private residences), the details of the means-test differ across payments with different disregards and taper rates.
Income tax
Income from most sources is subject to two taxes: income tax and the Universal Social Charge (USC).4 Both these are levied on an annual basis, with deduction at source for employees by employers – called Pay As You Earn (PAYE) – and only a small share of taxpayers required to submit a self-assessed tax return compared countries such as the United States or France. Both taxes are levied at (marginal) rates that rise with income, giving rise to a progressive schedule. A key difference between the taxes is that while employee pension contributions are exempt from income tax when made and instead taxed when funds are drawn down, these are subject to the USC both when paid into and when taken out of a pension (Kakoulidou and Roantree, 2021, pp. 32– 4). In addition, unlike income tax, rates of USC are reduced for those above age 70 (or in receipt of a means-tested medical card), and while the USC is levied on an individual basis, income tax is jointly assessed for married couples (unless they elect to be independently assessed).
Labour-market institutions
Ireland has had a national minimum wage applying to the hourly wages of most employees since April 2000, with reduced rates (called subminimum wage rates) applying to those aged 20 or below, employed by a close relative or in a statutory apprenticeship.5 In addition, workers in some

1 For an overview of this system see https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare- system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance
2 Kakoulidou, Doolan and Roantree (2022) provide a short overview of the background to this system in their analysis of recent proposals to introduce a more earnings-related social insurance payment for those who become unemployed.
3		See	https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance- payments/social-assistance-in-ireland/ for an overview of these and other social assistance payments.
4 Notable exceptions are capital gains (which are instead subject to Capital Gains Tax) and inheritances, gifts or bequests (which are instead subject to Capital Acquisitions Tax). For more on these see Kakoulidou and Roantree (2021).
5  For details on these rates, see https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and- conditions/pay-and-employment/minimum-wage/#b55e96



sectors are subject to higher minimum rates of pay set through an Employment Regulation Order (e.g., those in the early learning and childcare sector) or a Sectoral Employment Order (e.g., those in the mechanical engineering building services contracting sector).6 Between 1987 and 2009, a broader form of collective pay negotiations was in operation termed Social Partnership. This involved negotiations on pay and conditions in addition to policy on taxation, welfare and public services between the government, major employer groups and trade unions. These were extended to include representatives of voluntary and community organisations from 1997, with McGuinness, Kelly and O’Connell (2010) and Lane (1998) – among others – arguing that Social Partnership played an important role in underpinning growth in the Irish economy over this time by enhancing competitiveness through the wage restraint engendered.












































6 For further details on these employment orders, see https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment- rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/employment-agreements-and-orders/

4. Individual employment and earnings
This section looks at trends in individual employment, education, wages and earnings. Due to a lack of reliable data on hours worked for the self-employed, we restrict the analysis of earnings, wages and hours to employees, but include both employees and the self-employed in our initial analysis of trends in employment.

4.1 Trends in employment
Figure 1 shows employment rates by gender and age from 1987 to 2019, using the definition based on positive reported earnings described above. The most striking development is the substantial narrowing of the gap in employment rates between men and women aged 25–60, which has fallen from 49 to 13 percentage points over the horizon. This has been driven by an almost continuous rise in the employment rates of women aged 25–60, with the brief exception of the period from 2007 to 2010 following the financial crisis when employment rates for this group fell, though by less than they did for men. Employment rates for younger adults (aged 16–24) have also risen over the horizon covered by our data (particularly for men), while those for older adults (aged 61–74) fell between 1987 and 2013, with a small rise subsequently for both men and women.

Figure 1. Employment rates by age and sex, over time
 Male, 16–24	 Male, 25–60	 Male, 61–74
 Female, 16–24	 Female, 25–60	 Female, 61–74
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.
Figure 2 summarises patterns of employment over the life cycle in selected years: 1987, 1997, 2007 and 2019. For men, employment rates are similar across the selected years, reaching their peak around age 40 with a gradual decline thereafter. For women, the life-cycle pattern is different and has changed dramatically over time. While women in Ireland have – and have had – similar employment rates at young ages, these reached a peak at age 24 in 1987 and declined sharply over women’s later 20s and 30s. By 1997, employment rates for women were instead peaking around age 30 with a far less precipitous fall thereafter, and one that has become even more gradual since. This is in part related to the late lifting of the marriage bar in Ireland, on accession to the (then) European Community in 1973. Mosca and Wright (2020) show the practice was very widespread and led to much shorter working lives among those women affected. Nevertheless, it remains the case that employment rates are lower for women than for men across the life cycle in 2019, with the gap greatest at ages 30–40.



Figure 2. Employment rates over life cycle by sex, selected years




100%

Female


100%

Male


80%	80%

60%	60%

40%	40%

20%	20%


0%
15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50556065 70
Age

0%
15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 556065 70
Age



Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.
Another remarkable change in the Irish labour market and society over the past three decades is the rise in educational attainment. This is shown in Figure 3, which plots the share of those age 25–60 with lower-secondary or less (ISCED 0–2) and tertiary or more (ISCED 6–8) education, along with the group in between: those with upper-secondary or further education (ISCED 3–5). While just 11% of the working-age population had tertiary or higher education in 1987, this had reached 20% by 1998, doubling to 40% by 2010 and reaching almost 60% by 2019. At the same time, the share of the working-age population with lower-secondary or less education fell from 70% in 1987 to 17% in 2019.

Figure 4 shows that the rapid rise in tertiary education occurred among both men and women, with little difference in tertiary education rates evident in either 1987 or 2019. In contrast, lower- secondary or less education was and continues to be more prevalent among men, with a rate of 20% for men in 2019, down from 73% in 1987. This compares to rates of 14% and 67% for women in 2019 and 1987, respectively. The biggest gap between men and women lies in rates of ISCED 3– 5 education, which have historically been higher for women than for men, though this gap has narrowed recently.

Figures 5 and 6 display the employment rates for these education groups, split by sex in Figure 6. Figure 5 shows that employment rates have fluctuated around 80% for those with tertiary or more education, reflecting the economic cycle, with no clear trend evident over time. However, this masks substantial differences between women and men, with Figure 6 showing employment rates for tertiary-educated women have been rising from a lower level than for men since 1987, with those for men falling over the same period leaving the gap in employment rates at just 6 percentage points in 2019, down from 36 percentage points in 1987.

While an upward trend in employment rates – interrupted by the Great Recession and the slow recovery – is more evident for the other education groups, Figure 6 again shows that this is driven more by a rise in the employment rates of women from a low level. Employment rates for men – particularly men with non-tertiary education – appear more volatile than for women, with large declines seen in the aftermath of the Great Recession persisting even by 2019.


 ISCED 0–2	 ISCED 3–5	 ISCED 6–8

80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.

Figure 4. Educational attainment by sex, over time
 Male: ISCED 0–2	 Male: ISCED 3–5	 Male: ISCED 6–8
 Female: ISCED 0–2  Female: ISCED 3–5	 Female: ISCED 6–8
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.



Figure 5. Employment rates by education, over time

 ISCED 0–2	 ISCED 3–5	 ISCED 6–8

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.


Figure 6. Employment rates by sex and education, over time
 Male: ISCED 0–2	 Male: ISCED 3–5	 Male: ISCED 6–8
 Female: ISCED 0–2  Female: ISCED 3–5	 Female: ISCED 6–8
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.

 Short-term  Long-term

18.0%
16.0%
14.0%
12.0%
10.0%
8.0%
6.0%
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
1998Q1 2001Q1 2004Q1 2007Q1 2010Q1 2013Q1 2016Q1 2019Q1 2022Q1
Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 15+.
Source: Author’s calculations using Labour Force Survey tables QFL22 and QFL01.

Figure 7 shows the adverse effects of the Great Recession on the labour market more clearly. It plots the unemployment rate for those aged 25–60 split by the duration of unemployment (whether an individual has been unemployed for less or more than a year), showing a sharp and sustained rise in the unemployment rate between 2008 and 2013. Particularly striking is the rise in long-term unemployment as a share of overall unemployment, making up almost half by 2012.


4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)
Figure 8 plots inflation-adjusted median hourly wages for employees of working age from 1987 to 2019, split by sex. It excludes self-employed workers, given concerns about the measurement of hours for this group. This shows that while median hourly wages increased between 1987 and 1994 for both men and women, there was little growth in real terms over the 1990s. Growth resumed over the 2000s, with median wages peaking in 2010 before falling sharply over the course of the Great Recession. However, median wages fell by more for men than for women over the downturn, leading the raw gender gap in median wages to narrow from an average of 16.4% before 2010 to just 4.4% by 2012. This narrowing in the gender gap has persisted with the recovery in hourly wages since 2014, which finally surpassed their 2010 levels in 2019 for both men and for women.

Figure 9 further explores these trends, splitting median hourly wages by both education and sex. This shows that, conditional on education, real median wages are still below their 2010 level for both men and women, suggesting that much of the recovery in median wages overall in recent years has been compositional, in particular due to the rapid rise in educational attainment shown in the previous section. Nevertheless, the gender wage gap has narrowed within each education group but remains greatest at median wages for the lowest education group (ISCED 0–2).

In Figure 10, we explore how hourly wages evolve over the life cycle, and how this evolution varies by sex and education over three distinct periods: 1987, 1994–97 and 2016–19. While the data are noisy in some periods due to small sample sizes, it is clear that the age profiles of wages are much flatter for the lowest education group. Also striking is the relatively small gender wage gap for tertiary-educated workers at younger ages throughout, with the narrowing of this gap more evident at older ages, in part due to the stagnation of real wages for older men between the late 1990s and late 2010s.



Figure 8. Median real hourly wage among employees, overall and by sex, over time

 Male	 Female	 All

25

20

15

10

5

0
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. Wages are in 2019 prices.


Figure 9. Median real hourly wage among employees, by sex and education, over time
 Male: ISCED 0–2	 Male: ISCED 3–5	 Male: ISCED 6–8
 Female: ISCED 0–2  Female: ISCED 3–5	 Female: ISCED 6–8
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year

Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. Wages are in 2019 prices.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.

Figure 10. Median real hourly wage among employees over life cycle, by sex and education
Male	Female



ISCED 0–2
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

1987
ISCED 3–5
40	40
35	35
30	30
25	25
20	20
15	15
10	10
5	5
0	0


ISCED 6–8





Age


ISCED 0-2
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Age

ISCED 0–2
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Age
1994 to 1997
ISCED 3-5
40	40
35	35
30	30
25	25
20	20
15	15
10	10
5	5
0	0

Age
2016 to 2019
ISCED 3–5
40	40
35	35
30	30
25	25
20	20
15	15
10	10
5	5
0	0

Age


ISCED 6-8


Age

ISCED 6–8





Age

Age

Age


Note: Wages are shown in 2019 constant-wage terms. Individuals in the bottom two and top one percentiles of the gender- and year-specific hourly wage distributions are excluded. Hourly wages are averaged over 5 years.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.



Figure 11. Gini coefficient of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time

 All	 Male	 Female

0.350
0.300
0.250
0.200
0.150
0.100
0.050
0.000
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. The top and bottom 1% of the gender-specific wage distribution are excluded.

Figure 11 plots inequality in overall and within-sex hourly wages as measured by the Gini coefficient, while Figure 12 presents some other summary measures of inequality – the 90:10 and 50:10 percentile ratios – for the same groups. These exclude self-employed workers and trim both the top and bottom percentile of gender-specific wages in each year. These charts show that while overall wage inequality has increased over the full horizon our data cover according to the Gini coefficient (rising from 0.269 in 1987 to 0.282 in 2019), the 90:10 and 50:10 ratios are more stable. However, as with previous figures, this rise in overall inequality masks very different developments within sex, with the Gini and the 90:10 ratio rising for men but falling – modestly – for women over the full horizon, with the bulk of this decline occurring over the 1990s. The 50:10 ratio exhibits a similar though somewhat less pronounced pattern, falling from 2.0 to 1.8 for women and rising from 1.6 to 1.8 for men over the period as a whole.

Figure 12. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time
 All: 90:10 ratio	 Male: 90:10 ratio	 Female: 90:10 ratio
 All: 50:10 ratio	 Male: 50:10 ratio	 Female: 50:10 ratio
5


4


3


2


1
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. The top and bottom 1% of the gender-specific wage distribution are excluded.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.


Figure 13 plots the annualised growth rate of hourly wages by percentile for selected periods. Overall, the panels show that from 1987 to 2019 wage growth was stronger for women across the bottom three-quarters of the distribution, with men’s growth starting to outpace women’s from the 74th percentile upwards. From 1987 to 1994 the growth rate for men and women below the median is similar, but as we move further up the distribution the growth in men’s wages is far stronger. However, from 1994 to 2007 female wage growth is stronger at all points of the distribution. This trend continued from 2007 to 2019, again, with the exception of the top if the distribution where male wage growth was stronger.



Figure 13. Growth in hourly wages among employees by wage percentile, by sex, selected periods

5	Male	Female

4

3

2

1

5	Male	Female

4

3

2

1



0



5
4
3
2
1
0
-1



Percentile
Male	Female











Percentile

0



4

3

2

1

0

-1



Percentile
Male	Female











Percentile


Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. The top and bottom 1% of the gender-specific wage distribution are excluded.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.



4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)
We now turn to examine weekly hours of work among non-self-employed workers. Figure 14 plots the usual weekly hours reported by men, by women, and overall. This shows that over the horizon our data cover (1987–2019), men in paid employment have – on average – worked 8 hours more per week than women. However, the average for both men and women declined over the 2000s, from 43 hours per week in the mid-1990s to 38 hours per week in the 2010s for men, and from 35 hours per week to 31 hours per week for women.

Figure 15 stratifies average usual hours worked by education as well as sex, and shows that the decline in average hours worked by both men and women is as a result of declines in hours worked by those without tertiary education. Indeed, whereas both male and female employees without tertiary education worked at least as many hours as those with tertiary education in 1987, this was no longer the case by 2007, with the period since seeing the gap widen further. Figure 16 – while quite noisy given relatively small sample sizes – shows that the decline in hours worked by men has been particularly pronounced at the bottom of the earnings distribution.

Figure 14. Mean weekly hours worked among employees, overall and by sex, over time

 Male	 Female	 All

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.
Figure 15. Mean weekly hours worked among employees, by sex and education, over time
 Male: ISCED 0–2	 Male: ISCED 3–5	 Male: ISCED 6–8
 Female: ISCED 0–2  Female: ISCED 3–5	 Female: ISCED 6–8
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.



Figure 16. Annualised growth in mean hours worked among employees by hourly wage ventile, overall and by sex, selected years



2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5

Male	Female











Hourly wage ventile


2.0

1.0

0.0

-1.0

-2.0

-3.0

Male	Female

Hourly wage ventile




2.0

Male	Female


2.0

Male	Female


1.0	1.0

0.0	0.0

-1.0	-1.0


-2.0

-3.0




Hourly wage ventile

-2.0

-3.0




Hourly wage ventile

Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.

4.4 Inequality in individual earnings (employees only)
We now move on to consider inequality in individual earnings: the product of hourly wages and hours worked. Again, we restrict our sample to employees, with Figure 17 plotting the median of earnings for those age 25–60 overall and by sex from 1987 to 2019. Like hourly wages, the pattern is one initially of growth, followed by stagnation over the mid -to late 1990s. Growth resumed over the 2000s until the financial crisis, with median earnings falling sharply in the immediate aftermath for men and only regaining their pre-financial crisis peak in 2019 following a period of stagnation. While growth in median earnings has been stronger and less volatile for women, contributing to a reduction in the gender gap from about a third in the mid-2000s to a fifth in the most recent years of data, this gender earnings gap is substantially larger than that in hourly wages.
This in large part reflects the differences in hours worked shown in the previous section, which also help explain the substantial within-education group gender earnings gaps evident in Figure
18. These gaps are particularly striking for those without tertiary education. This is despite – as we saw in Section 3.2 – a reduction in the gender wage gap for those without tertiary education and reflects the decline in average hours worked by women without tertiary education documented above. As a result, median earnings for these less-educated women have been largely stagnant over the horizon our data cover, although as we have seen the size of this group has shrunk significantly.
This stagnation in earnings for lower-educated employees has contributed to patterns of earnings inequality experienced over the last three decades. This is shown in Figures 19–21, which plot the Gini coefficient and selected percentile ratios for the earnings of men, women and overall, along with – in Figure 20 – the Gini coefficient for a broader definition of employee compensation that adds employer social security contributions – called Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI) – to earnings. After exhibiting a decline over the early 1990s, there was a sustained rise in all these measures of earnings inequality over the 2000s coinciding with the period when earnings rose for tertiary-educated workers but stagnated for less-educated workers, especially women. These measures of earnings inequality were relatively stable in the period following the financial crisis (when earnings fell sharply for both men and women with tertiary education), even falling from 2015 as the recovery in the labour market took hold.
Figure 22 shows these developments in patterns of earnings growth and inequality in another way, plotting growth across the distribution of earnings for men and women separately over four selected periods. These show that while the earnings of women grew faster at the very bottom of the distribution than the top (or middle) over the early 1990s, the opposite was true between 1997 and 2007. Similar patterns are observed over these periods for men, although the rates of growth experienced are much lower. By contrast, while earnings growth for women was again positive and progressive over the period 2007–19 that encompassed the crash and recovery, there was no growth across most of the distribution for men with the exception of the very top. The bottom-right panel shows that putting these periods together, earnings growth was progressive for women but regressive for men. Finally, Figure 23 shows that using the broader definition of employee compensation including employer PRSI does not affect the patterns of growth observed over these periods, particularly in the period after 2000 when the cap on PRSI was removed, making employer cost effectively a linear transformation of earnings.



Figure 17. Median real gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time

 Male	 Female	 All
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. Earnings are in 2019 prices.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.
Figure 18. Median real gross individual earnings, by sex and education, over time
 Male: ISCED 0–2	 Male: ISCED 3–5	 Male: ISCED 6–8
 Female: ISCED 0–2  Female: ISCED 3–5	 Female: ISCED 6–8
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. Earnings are in 2019 prices.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.

Figure 19. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time

 All	 Male	 Female

0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. Earnings are in 2019 prices.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.



Figure 20. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings and total employer cost, over time

 Earnings	 Employer cost

0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. Earnings are in 2019 prices.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.



Figure 21. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time
 All: 90:10 ratio	 Male: 90:10 ratio	 Female: 90:10 ratio
 All: 50:10 ratio	 Male: 50:10 ratio	 Female: 50:10 ratio
8	4
7	4
6	3
5	3
4	2
3	2
2	1
1	1
0	0
1980	1990	2000	2010	2020
Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. Earnings are in 2019 prices.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.
Figure 22. Growth in gross earnings by earnings percentile, overall and sex, selected periods


7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0



5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2

Male	Female












Percentile
Male	Female











Percentile


4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2



4

3

2

1

0

-1

Male	Female


Percentile

Male	Female











Percentile


Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. The top and bottom 5% of the gender-specific wage distribution are excluded.

Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions..



Figure 23. Growth in gross earnings and employer cost by earnings percentile, selected periods

3	Earnings	Employer cost 2
2

1

1

0
Percentile
5	Earnings	Employer cost
3 
Earnings	Employer cost 2
2
1
1
0
-1
-1
-2


4 Earnings	Employer cost


4	3

3	2

2	1


1

0
Percentile

0

-1	Percentile

Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. The top and bottom 5% of the distributions are excluded. Employer cost estimated using main class A rates.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.


4.5 Self-employment

Figure 24 plots the share of workers aged 25–60 who are self-employed over time. This has almost halved since 1987, falling from 21.2% to 12.9% in 2019, in part reflecting a sustained decline in agricultural employment which largely – though not exclusively – comprises self-employed workers. The chart also shows from 2004 how these self-employed workers are split between solo self-employment and other types of self-employment (e.g., self-employed with employees and/or family workers). Solo self-employment comprises the majority of those in self- employment, though this category has declined slightly since 2004, as have other types of self- employment, falling from just over to just under 5% over the (short) period for which we have data.

Figure 24. Share of employees and self-employed workers, over time
 Self-employed	 Solo self-employed  Other self-employed
30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Individuals age 25–60 years of age. ‘Solo self-employed’ are self-employed without employees, ‘other self-employed’ include self-employed with employees and family workers.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions..


Figure 25 shows that the share of workers who are self-employed differs substantially by sex and education. Men – particularly those with lower-secondary or less education – are far more likely to be self-employed than women. Similarly, Figure 26 shows that lower-earning workers are much more likely to be self-employed than higher-earning workers, though there is a U-shaped pattern with the share rising at the very top of the distribution.

Figure 25. Share self-employed by sex and education, over time
 Male: ISCED 0–2	 Male: ISCED 3–5	 Male: ISCED 6–8
 Female: ISCED 0–2  Female: ISCED 3–5	 Female: ISCED 6–8
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.



Figure 24. Share self-employed by ventile of individual earnings, selected years
1997	2007	2017

70.0%
60.0%
50.0%
40.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
0.0%



0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Combined employment and self-employment earnings ventile


Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.
Note: Sample is employees aged 25–60. Earnings are in 2019 prices. Earnings here includes both those from employment and self-employment.

5. Labour market institutions
This section looks at some labour market institutions that affect earnings and incomes: minimum wages, collective bargaining, and benefits from the state.
5.1 Minimum wage and unions
Ireland introduced a minimum wage of €5.58 (£4.40) in April 2000. Figure 27 shows how the ‘bite’ of this minimum wage has changed over time using two different measures. The first plots the share of employees aged 25–64 with an hourly wage of less than 1.2 times the minimum wage, while the second plots the ratio of the minimum wage to gross median hourly earnings. The chart shows that while the minimum wage has stood at around half gross median hourly earnings since it was introduced, the share of employees covered has varied substantially. The minimum wage initially covered 12.2% of employees with subsequent increases (2001, 2002, 2004, 2005, and 2007) lifting this share to a peak of 15.7% in 2007. The minimum wage was frozen at its 2007 level until 2011 when it was (briefly) cut by €1 in January before that cut was reversed in July following a general election, contributing alongside changes in the composition of the workforce to coverage falling to 10.5% in 2011. With the recovery in the labour market – particularly for lower-paid employees – since 2012, coverage has increased again and stood at 17.3% in 2019.

Another important factor affecting earnings is the prevalence. Figure 28 plots estimates of the trade union density rate and collective bargaining coverage taken from the OECD OECD/AIAS database on Institutional Characteristics of Trade Unions, Wage Setting, State Intervention and Social Pacts (ICTWSS). Unlike earlier figures, these are estimates for all employees rather than just those aged 25–60, and show that, like many other countries over the same period, Ireland has seen a decline in the share of workers who are a member of a trade union and are covered by a collective bargaining agreement, falling from a peak of 57% and 70% respectively in 1980 to 24% and 34% in 2017.
Figure 27. Bite of the minimum wage, over time
 Proportion below 1.2x minimum wage  Min. wage to P50 gross hourly wage

20%

18%

15%

13%

10%

8%

5%

3%

0%
2000  2002  2004  2006  2008  2010	2012	2014	2016	2018	2020
Year

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0



Note: Individuals aged 25–64. Minimum wage applying at the point surveyed.

Figure 28. Union density and fraction of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements, over time

 Union density	 Collective bargaining coverage

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1980	1990	2000	2010	2020
Year
Source: OECD/AIAS database on Institutional Characteristics of Trade Unions, Wage Setting, State Intervention and Social Pacts (ICTWSS). Available at https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=CBC#

5.2 Benefits from the state
The next series of figures illustrate the redistribution achieved by the tax, transfer and social insurance system and how this has changed over time. To examine this, we move from looking at exclusively individual earnings and aggregate income and tax payments to the household level. Each individual is assigned the household value, with the following figures splitting the sample based on the quartile of the equivalised disposable (net of direct taxes and transfers) income distribution in each year.

Figure 29 shows that cash benefits are highest as a share of gross household income for the lowest net-income quartile of individuals at 60% on average over the period: double the share of the second quartile. While the share of gross income comprising benefits is much lower for the highest two quartiles, this has also fluctuated over time, rising notably for all quartiles in the aftermath of the Great Recession before falling with the economic recovery.

Figure 30 shows that tax payments as a share of gross income also increased for higher income quartiles in the aftermath of the Great Recession, reflecting the introduction of a new graduated tax (the Universal Social Charge) and the uncapping of social security contributions (PRSI). This rise in average tax rates offset – and for the top quartile even reversed – much of the decline seen over the 1990s and 2000s, which was a period when real increases to tax thresholds took many out of the income tax net at the same time as rates of taxation – especially income tax – were reduced (Callan, Bercholz and Walsh, 2018).

The rise in average tax rates for the highest income quartile has also contributed to a decline in the ratio of disposable to gross income. This is shown in Figures 31 and 32, excluding and including employer social security contributions, respectively. This affects the level but not the trend, reducing the ratio by an average of 5 percentage points, less for the lowest income quartile.



Figure 29. Benefits as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile
 Lowest  2  3  Highest
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Quartile averages calculated across individuals 25–60 years of age, though assigned to quartiles of net household income constructed for the entire population.
Figure 30. Tax payments as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile
 Lowest  2  3  Highest
35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Quartile averages calculated across individuals 25–60 years of age, though assigned to quartiles of net household income constructed for the entire population.

Figure 31. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile
 Lowest  2  3  Highest
100%
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%
70%
65%
60%
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Quartile averages calculated across individuals 25–60 years of age, though assigned to quartiles of net household income constructed for the entire population.

Figure 32. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income plus employer payroll cost, by net household income quartile
 Lowest  2  3  Highest
100%
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%
70%
65%
60%
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Quartile averages calculated across individuals 25–60 years of age, though assigned to quartiles of net household income constructed for the entire population.

6. Household incomes
This section examines how household composition and incomes have changed over time. We start by looking at trends in household composition and the degree of assortative matching, which partly determine household earnings. We then compare trends in household earnings and household disposable income for working households, drawing out the role of the tax and transfer system over time. Finally, we show a set of charts on trends in household income inequality across all households including those where no one is in work.

6.1 Trends in household composition
As in many other countries, Ireland has seen a huge change in the structure of families, with important implications for inequality. Figure 33 shows that the share of the working-age population who are married or cohabiting has fallen from 79% in 1987 to 70% in 2019. Indeed, this somewhat understates the extent of the fall as we are not able to identify unmarried couples in the 1987 data, only those who are married. While there were only small differences in marriage rates across education groups in 1987, there is now a substantial one, with just 65% of those in the lowest education group married or cohabitating in 2019 compared to 75% of those in the highest education group.

Figure 33. Share married/cohabiting, overall and by education, over time
 All	 ISCED 0–2	 ISCED 3–5	 ISCED 6–8
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education. 1987 data only includes share married. Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.

Figure 34 shows that there are also gradients by earnings which have changed over time in both the likelihood of being married or cohabitating, and – for those who are – having a working partner. The left-hand-side panels of Figure 34 show that while higher-earning men have always been more likely than lower-earning men to have a partner, it is only recently that it has also become more likely that their partner would be in paid work. Similarly, the right-hand-side panels show that while it used to be the case that lower-earning women were more likely than middle- earning women to have a partner also in paid work, this gap has narrowed over time with the series sloping slightly upwards in 2019 rather than downwards as in 1987.

Figure 34. Share married and share with working partner, by sex and individual gross earnings percentile, selected years
Working: Married/cohabiting	Working: Has a working partner
 Non-working: Married/cohabiting	  Non-working: Has a working partner

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%



100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%



100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
















5	15	25	35  45  55  65	75	85
Male gross earnings percentile













5	15	25	35  45  55  65	75	85
Male gross earnings percentile













5	15	25	35  45  55  65	75	85
Male gross earnings percentile






5	15	25	35	45	55	65	75	85
Female gross earnings percentile






15	25	35	45	55  65	75	85  95
Female gross earnings percentile






15	25	35	45	55	65	75	85	95
Female gross earnings percentile



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. Shares are smoothed across percentiles of gender-specific earnings distribution using a bandwidth of ±2 percentiles. The proportion with a working partner is conditional on being married.



Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.
Figure 35. Mean gross earnings percentile of partner/spouse by individual’s gross earnings percentile, selected years




100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Female










Female gross earnings percentile


100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Male


Male gross earnings percentile


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. We exclude the bottom and top 5% of the gender-specific earnings distribution. Mean earnings of partners are smoothed using a bandwidth of ±2 percentiles across the earnings distribution.

Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions..


Figure 35 shows that in addition to being more likely to have a working partner, higher-earning men have also become more likely to have a higher-earning partner. This is shown in the right- hand side panel by the steeper gradient in the average (percentile) rank of men’s working partners in 2019 (blue series) than 1987 (yellow), and reflects an increase in assortative matching: where higher earners partner with higher earners. However, while such assortative matching has become more pronounced for men, the left-hand-side panel shows this is not the case for women, with the gradient in 2019 (blue series) similar or perhaps slightly shallower than that in 1987 (yellow). Indeed, the average percentile rank of working women’s partners has fallen slightly across the distribution of women’s earnings.

The next two figures examine how the composition of households has changed over time, plotting the share of the working-age population by their household type since 1994. Figure 36 shows that the most prevalent household type over the period covered (1994–2019) was a married or cohabitating couple with children, at about a third. However, perhaps the most striking development has been the sharp increase in the share of individuals who are lone parents from 1.4% of working-age individuals in 1994 to 4.3% in 2019. There has also been a large increase in the share of the working-age population made up of couples without children, up from 13.6% in 1994 to 17% in 2019.

Figure 36. Share of individuals by position in the household, over time
 Single, no children	 Single, children	 Couple, no children
   Couple, children	 Adult child	 Other 100%
90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. ‘Single, children’ and ‘couple, children’ refer to dependent children only. Parents of adult children are categorised as ‘other’.

Source: Authors’ calculations using the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions..


Figure 37 repeats this exercise, splitting the working-age population by sex and education level. It shows that the rise in the share of lone parents is concentrated among women, with the largest increase being among those with tertiary education, from less than 1% in 1994 to 7% in 2019: little different from the 8% of women without tertiary education. For men, the most striking change is the rise in the share of single adults, particularly among men without tertiary education: up from 7.5% in 1994 to 15% in 2019 for the lowest education group.



Figure 37. Share of individuals by position in the household, by sex and education, over time
 Single, no children	 Single, children	 Couple, no children
    Couple, children	 Adult child	 Other 100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%



100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Year

Year






100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Year

Year





Year	Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.

6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households
Figure 38 plots the share of working-age individuals who are in a working household (where someone is in paid work) by education over time. It shows there are large differences by education, with more than 90% of those with tertiary education in a working household throughout, with the exception of 2011–13 following the financial crisis. By contrast, the share of those with lower-secondary or less education (ISCED 0–2) in a working household has never exceeded 80%, falling sharply over the Great Recession, and stood at just 62% in 2019, well below its pre-financial crisis level of 73%.
Figure 38. Share of individuals in a working household, by education, over time
 All	 ISCED 0–2	 ISCED 3–5	 ISCED 6-8
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult of working age is in paid work.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.

Figure 39. Median real gross household earnings and disposable household income, by household working status, over time

€35
€30
€25
€20
€15
€10
€5
€0
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Sample is individuals in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in paid work. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.



Figure 40. Annualised growth in real equivalised gross household earnings and household disposable income for working households, by percentile, selected years



6	1987 to 1997	6
5	5
4	4
3	3
2	2
1	1
0	0

Percentile
6	2007 to 2019	6
5	5
4	4
3	3
2	2
1	1
0	0

Percentile

1997 to 2007

Percentile
1987 to 2019

Percentile


Note: Sample is individuals in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions..


As in other countries, there is a close relationship between incomes and whether there is someone in paid work in a household. This is shown in Figure 39, which plots gross equivalised household earnings for working households alongside net (after tax and transfer) equivalised disposable income for working, non-working and all households over time. However, this gap has narrowed over time, with the median disposable income for those in working households falling from twice to 1.6 times that of those in non-working households.

Figure 40 plots the annualised average real growth rate in gross household earnings from employment or self-employment and net/disposable income across the distribution for those in working households. This shows that while disposable income grew faster than gross household earnings – particularly at the bottom of the distribution – between 1987 and 2007, disposable income growth was around the same as (or, for the top half of the distribution, less than) gross earnings growth between 2007 and 2019. This partly reflects an increase in the generosity of transfers and a reduction in personal taxation over the 1990s and 2000s, alongside the reverse during the years following the financial crisis (Callan, Bercholz and Walsh, 2018).


6.3 Inequality in incomes among all working-age households

We finally turn to consider inequality in household incomes across all individuals of working age, whether in a working or non-working household. Figure 41 plots median real equivalised disposable income for these individuals by education over time. This shows that individuals with tertiary or higher education have substantially higher incomes on average than those without, though the gap has narrowed proportionally as a larger share of the working-age population has obtained at least a tertiary degree. Figure 41 also shows that while median incomes grew rapidly over the 1990s and 2000s, they fell substantially following the financial crisis. While median incomes overall had by 2019 regained their pre-crisis level (just), this is not the case conditional on education, with the median for those with tertiary or higher education still 10% below its pre- crisis peak in 2019. Nevertheless, median incomes overall have continued to grow in part because of compositional changes, with – as we have seen in Section 3 – an ever larger share of the working-age population obtaining tertiary or higher education.

Figure 41. Median real equivalised disposable household income for all households, overall and by education, over time
 All	 ISCED 0–2	 ISCED 3–5	 ISCED 6-–8
€45,000
€40,000
€35,000
€30,000
€25,000
€20,000
€15,000
€10,000
€5,000
€0
1980	1990	2000	2010	2020
Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education.
Source: Authors’ calculations using the ESRI Survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services, the Living in Ireland Survey and the EU Survey of Income and Living Conditions.
To get a more complete picture of inequality in disposable income that is less affected by these compositional changes, we look at summary measures of disposable income inequality across the working-age population in Figures 42 and 43. Figure 42 plots the Gini coefficient (overall, and winsorised at the 99th percentile), the top 1% share and the relative poverty rate (the share in households with less than 60% of the contemporary median). While this estimate of the top 1% share is likely to substantially understate the level of top income inequality (as it is based on household survey data without any correction for underreporting or coverage), the trend in the three other measures is downwards, with particularly large reductions in the Gini coefficient whether winsorised or not: from 0.331 and 0.344 to 0.265 and 0.278, respectively.

Figure 43 shows that other measures of income inequality – namely the 90:10, 50:10 and 90:50 percentile ratios – have also fallen over the horizon our data cover, with the decline in the top-half ratios particularly pronounced from 4.5 in 1987 to 3.3 by 2019. Taken together, the picture that emerges is one of falling income inequality with the exception of the very top, for which the available data are not well placed to provide an estimate.



Figure 42. Net income Gini, top 1% share a relative poverty for all households, over time
 Gini coefficient	 Gini coefficient (winsorised)  Top 1% share (right axis)	 Relative poverty rate (right axis)

0.400
0.350
0.300
0.250
0.200
0.150
0.100
0.050
0.000

20%


15%


10%


5%


0%

1980	1990	2000	2010	2020
Year


Note: Winsorised Gini computed excluding top 1%. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with less than 60% of contemporaneous disposable median income. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Sample is individuals aged 25–60 who have completed full-time education.

Figure 43. Percentile ratios of disposable household incomes for all households, over time

 90:10	 50:10	 90:50

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015	2020
Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25–60. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

7. References
Beirne, K., Doorley, K., Regan, M., Roantree, B. and Tuda, D., 2020. The potential costs and distributional effect of COVID-19 related unemployment in Ireland, Budget Perspectives 2021-01. Dublin: ESRI. https://doi.org/10.26504/bp202101
Callan, T., Bercholz, M. and Walsh, J., 2018. Income growth and income distribution: A long-run view of Irish experience, Budget Perspectives 2019-03. Dublin: ESRI. https://doi.org/10.26504/bp201903
Callan, T., Nolan, B., Whelan, B., Hannan D. and Creighton S., 1989. Poverty, Income and Welfare in Ireland, General Research Series No. 146. Dublin: ESRI.
Eurostat, 2018. Methodological guidelines and description of EU-SILC target variables (2018 operation, July 2019 version. Eurostat: Brussels.
Kakoulidou, T., Doolan, M. and Roantree, B., 2022. Earnings-related benefits in Ireland: Rationale, costs and work incentives, Budget Perspectives 2023-02. Dublin: ESRI. https://doi.org/10.26504/BP202302
Kakoulidou, T. and Roantree, B., 2021. Options for raising tax revenue in Ireland, ESRI Budget Perspectives Series 2022-01. Dublin: ESRI. https://doi.org/10.26504/BP202201
McGuinness, S., Kelly, E. and O’Connell, P. J., 2010. The impact of wage bargaining regime on firm?level competitiveness and wage inequality: The case of Ireland. Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 49(4), 593–615.
Lane, P., 1998. Profits and wages in Ireland, 1987–1996. Journal of the Social and Statistical Society, 27(5), 223–52.
Mosca, I. and Wright, R. E., 2020. The long-term consequences of the Irish marriage bar. Economic and Social Review, 51(1), 1–34.
Nolan, B., 2003. Income inequality during Ireland’s boom. Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review, 92(366), 132–42. http://www.jstor.org/stable/30095606
Nolan, B. and Maître, B., 2000. A comparative perspective on trends in income inequality in Ireland. Economic and Social Review, 31(4), 329–50.
Roantree, B., Barrett, M. and Redmond, P., 2022. Poverty, income inequality and living standards in Ireland: Second annual report. Dublin: ESRI and The Community Foundation for Ireland.
Roantree, B. and Doorley, K., 2023. Poverty, income inequality and living standards in Ireland: Third annual report, Jointly-published Reports 4. Dublin: ESRI and Community Foundation Ireland. https://doi.org/10.26504/jr4
Roantree, B., Maître, B., McTague, A. and Privalko, I., 2021. Poverty, income inequality and living standards in Ireland. Dublin: ESRI and The Community Foundation for Ireland, Dublin.
Whelan, A., Devlin, A., McGuinness, S. and Redmond, P., 2023. Pandemic unemployment and social disadvantage in Ireland, ESRI Research Series 163. Dublin: ESRI. https://doi.org/10.26504/rs163


























































































































































































lnstitute for Fiscal Studies

Country Studies: Inequalities in Europe and North America
A parallel study to the IFS Deaton Review

Carlos Oliveira Pedro Portugal Pedro Raposo Hugo Reis




Inequality in Portugal: 1986-2020






















Inequality in Portugal: 1986-2020
Carlos Oliveira1, Pedro Portugal2,3, Pedro Raposo4, Hugo Reis2,4
1Paris School of Economics, 2Bank of Portugal, 3Nova School of Business and Economics,
4Católica Lisbon School of Business and Economics

Contents
Inequality in Portugal: 1986-2020	1
1. Executive summary	2
2. Institutional background	5
3. Notes on measurement and definitions	9
4. Individual employment and earnings	11
4.1 Trends in employment	11
4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)	16
4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)	21
4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self-
employed)	23
4.5 Self-employment	28
5. Labour market institutions	30
5.1 Minimum wage and unions	30
5.2 Taxes and benefits	31
6. Household incomes	34
6.1 Trends in household composition	34
6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households	38
6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households	41
7. Immigration	45
8. References	48
9. Data appendix	49
10. Appendix: 25-74 age group	50
















(c) Institute for Fiscal Studies	1

1. Executive summary
Employment, wages, hours and individual earnings

Since the 1990s, the employment rate among prime-aged men (aged 25-60) has been stationary at around 90%, while female employment has seen sustained growth, from 66% in 1992 to 82% in 2020, leading to a long-term reduction in the employment gender gap. The economic catastrophe that was the Great Recession, however, brought about a very sharp decline in employment across the board, which took as long as a decade to recover from - the unemployment rate reached 17% at its peak. The drop in employment was greater for the less educated but, while a college degree granted near-immunity to job loss in previous economic crises, higher-educated individuals were almost as exposed as other workers during the Great Recession.
This was also a result of the significant development of schooling since the 2000s - the school leaving age was raised, with a strong expansion of upper secondary (ISCED 3-5), as well as higher education (ISCED 6-8). This upsurge in education levels was compensated by a sharp decline in the share of prime-aged individuals with lower secondary education or less (ISCED 0- 2), from 81% in 1992 to 44% in 2020. The trends have been similar for men and women, although the share of college-educated women has risen faster than the share of men - by 2020 there was a 10 percentage point gender gap in higher education attainment rates.
When Portugal was first hit by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, both employment and unemployment were rather unaffected, largely due to job retention policies implemented by the Portuguese government. Official numbers show that it remained that way over 2021 and 2022.
The Portuguese median real hourly wage grew steadily during the late 1980s and 1990s, rose at a slower rate until 2009, and suffered a significant drop during the Great Recession - only recovering to pre-crisis levels in the late 2010s. Between 1986 and 2019, it grew at an average of less than 1% a year, mainly due to the prolonged wage stagnation of the first two decades of the twenty-first century. That stagnation has been much more pronounced for men, leading to a substantial reduction of the gender wage gap, from 35% to 20% over three decades. After entering the European Union in 1986, there was high demand for and short supply of skilled workers in Portugal, leading to a very significant rise in the wages of more educated workers. But those gains started to recede as more and more workers obtained better qualifications - the median wage among higher-educated men saw a 50% real rise between 1986 and 1995, which had fully disappeared by 2015. Average hours worked among employees declined from 43 hours per week in 1988 to 39 hours in 1999 due to working week reforms in 1991 and 1996, especially in the lower half of the wage distribution, and have suffered almost no change since then.
Wage inequality since 1986 can be clearly split into three periods. During the late 1980s and early 1990s wage inequality increased sharply, mostly at the top of the distribution: while workers at the bottom saw their wages grow by little more than 1% a year, workers at the top - the more educated - experienced growth rates of 5% a year. Between the mid-1990s and the mid-2000s, inequality remained high. From the mid-2000s, it started to rapidly fall, and that was mainly due to a compression of the distribution at the bottom - wages of workers at the bottom grew at around 2% a year, while workers at the top saw no wage growth at all. Furthermore, women's wages have also been growing faster than men's since the mid-1990s.



Regarding all workers' incomes, there has been a general stagnation in the median annual income since 1990, which has been fluctuating between €9,000 and €10,000 per year. Alongside this, there has been a sharp reduction in the gender earnings gap - while women used to earn nearly half of what men earned in 1990, they now make 85 cents for each euro a man makes - as well as a sharp drop in the college premium. Earnings inequality has fared similarly to wage inequality, rising in the early 1990s, staying high until the mid-2000s, and falling since then.
During the 1990s women experienced significant earnings growth across the distribution, while only the men at the very top saw any real growth. On the other hand, between 2004 and 2019 there was a very large decrease in inequality for both men and women, with individuals in the bottom decile enjoying income growth of the order of 5% a year, while those at the top of the distribution actually saw their earnings decrease. By 2004, the lower half of the income distribution was already very concentrated - the median income was twice the income of someone at the 10th percentile - but the rising minimum wage was able to narrow it further, with the median income being just 58% above the income at the 10th percentile by 2019. The 90:10 ratio fell from 5 in 2004 to 3.3 in 2019.
Labour market institutions

In symmetry to wage inequality, the bite of the minimum wage presented a U-shaped trajectory between 1986 and 2019. Its importance in the labour market declined strongly during the 1980s and 1990s, was generally stagnant until the mid-2000s, but has been rising fast since 2006 - by 2019, the minimum wage exceeded 60% of the median. Union density, however, which displayed rates above 70% after the democratic revolution of 1974, later fell to remarkably low levels, to just 15% in 2016. That decline has been attributed to the consistently high levels of collective contract coverage.
The Portuguese tax and benefits system has become more prominent in the wake of the Great Recession. Benefits as a proportion of gross income increased significantly in the lower half of the distribution as unemployment rose and many families had to resort to state benefits. Direct taxes as a share of gross income also increased during the crisis, but primarily at the top of the distribution. As the economy recovered, the reliance on benefits decreased, but direct taxes remained higher, leading to a gradual compression of disposable income as a share of gross income, with the most significant contraction observed at the top of the distribution.
Household incomes

Marriage/cohabitation rates have declined since the 1990s, from 80% to 70%. This was first driven by individuals with medium to high levels of education, and later by the less educated. Between 1990 and 2014, the likelihood of men being married or cohabitating decreased significantly, especially for non-working men, although the likelihood of men having a partner who works increased significantly. For women, however, marriage/cohabitation rates remained stable at around 70%. Still, a clear gender difference has persisted: while the likelihood of being in a couple is uncorrelated to income for women, high-earning men have a much higher likelihood of being in a couple than lower-earning men. Moreover, the position of a married/cohabiting person in the income distribution is almost directly proportional to their partner's position, and that has not changed through the years. The combined impact of these phenomena is to push up inequality in household earnings. Looking at family structure more broadly, the share of single adults increased by 9 percentage points between 1990 and 2014, compensated by an identical

decline in the share of adults in couples, and this occurred mostly among men, particularly the higher educated - single parenthood rates increased from 3% to 6%.
Median gross household earnings for working households have displayed a positive trend in recent years, rising from €11,200 to €12,800 a year between 2007 and 2019. The trend in disposable household income was similar (rising from €9,300 to €10,400), but smoother during the Great Recession, as the tax and benefits system smoothed out economic shocks. However, there was a very different behaviour in the upper and lower half of the household income distribution - households in the lower half of the distribution saw an annualised growth rate of 1% in gross and disposable income between 2007 and 2019, but growth was even smaller for households in the upper half - the top 20% of households have actually seen a real decline in their disposable income since 2007.
When considering all households, the median real disposable income of households has risen by about 2% a year over the last three decades, driven by lower-educated households - while lower- educated households saw a steady increase in their real income, from €4,400 to €7,800 a year between 1990 and 2019, households with at least one member with a college degree had, in 2019, a median income that was just 6% higher than in 1990. Household income inequality was generally increasing between 1990 and the mid-2000s, and has been decreasing since then, especially during the Great Recession. While inequality at the top of the household income distribution reflects that pattern, inequality at the bottom has been more stable over time, with a slightly decreasing trend. Generally, the Great Recession was a turning point for household income inequality in Portugal. After more than a decade of rising income inequality, especially at the top, the severe compression of incomes in the upper half of the distribution caused inequality not just to drop sharply, but to reverse its decade-long trend.
Immigration

Portugal retains a relatively low number of immigrants compared to other European nations, though there has been a slight increase from 8% to 11% of the adult population over the last decade. This immigrant demographic is predominantly composed of individuals coming from other European countries, from Portuguese-speaking African countries, and from Brazil. In terms of income distribution, immigrants are fairly evenly spread, with a more notable presence in the higher income brackets, likely due to the arrival of affluent, older individuals from central and northern Europe. In comparison to native Portuguese, immigrants generally show similar characteristics, with the notable exception of higher-education attainment, where migrants tend to have higher levels of education.


2. Institutional background
Portugal is a relatively small nation on the European periphery with a population of 10.6 million and a GDP per capita of around €24,000. Its economy is comparable in size to those of Greece and Czechia, and more closely aligned in structure to southern European countries, with shared challenges in terms of fiscal sustainability, low productivity and innovation levels, and an ageing population. The country's low wage level makes it competitive on labour costs in comparison to other western European countries, and its strategic location serves as a gateway to the Atlantic, crucial for trade relations and tourism. The services sector accounts for over two-thirds of GDP, and tourism alone has accounted for up to 20% in recent years.
Emerging from a protectionist economic model under the Estado Novo regime, Portugal's journey towards economic liberalisation commenced after the 1974 revolution, transitioning towards a more diversified and service-oriented economy, particularly after joining the European Community in 1986. The late twentieth century brought about rapid economic growth, but the new millennium has posed several challenges for the Portuguese economy, the culmination of which was the catastrophic Great Recession. The introduction of the euro in 2002 marked a significant era, albeit leading to a debt-fuelled domestic demand boom, followed by a period of protracted growth and escalating debt until global economic crises pushed Portugal into a severe recession. The subsequent recovery since around 2016 has been characterised by improved fiscal deficits, reduced unemployment, and greater GDP growth. Like other southern European countries, the COVID pandemic led to a significant economic contraction, driven by the strong reliance on tourism, but from which the country recovered relatively quickly.
Welfare state

Portugal has developed a welfare state model closely aligned with the southern European welfare regime, but its expansion started relatively late due to prolonged dictatorial governance (Estado Novo). After the 1974 Carnation Revolution, Portugal began a journey to construct its welfare state, providing a blend of social insurance and social assistance schemes.
The social security system is based on contributions from employees, employers and the self- employed (as of today the contribution rate for employees stands at 11% of gross wages, while employers contribute 23.75% and the self-employed contribute at varying rates depending on their income and activities). It covers sickness, maternity, paternity, adoption, unemployment, occupational diseases, disability, old age and death. Most benefits are proportional to one's contribution record, barring a few non-contributory benefits aimed at supporting citizens with no contributory record and whose household income is below the established poverty line. Social security is crucial in the Portuguese welfare model and compares more closely to Italy and Spain than to the more universal models of Nordic countries and the UK.
Regarding social protection, Portugal offers a family allowance (Abono de Família) to families with children and young people, with the amount varying depending on the child's age and the family's income. This is somewhat similar to the UK's Child Benefit but is means-tested. Additionally, there are benefits for single-parent families and for families with multiple children. The important Rendimento Social de Inserção (Social Insertion Income) is a means-tested minimum income scheme aiming to support individuals and families in severe economic need.

Beneficiaries receive a monthly cash benefit and must participate in activation measures such as vocational training, community work, and job searches. State benefits are generally not taxable.
Unemployment protection in Portugal consists of unemployment insurance (for those who have contributed to social security) and unemployment assistance (for those with exhausted rights or those ineligible for unemployment insurance). Unemployment benefits are tied to one's earnings and contribution record. To qualify, one must have made contributions for at least 360 days in the 24 months before becoming unemployed. The amount received is based on the average earnings over the last 12 months, with benefits starting at 65% of the reference earnings and gradually reducing over time. This is somewhat more generous than the UK system but less so than countries like France and Germany. The maximum duration for unemployment benefits ranges from 180 days for those under 30 to 900 days for those over 40. The replacement rate is relatively high in the first few months but decreases thereafter.
Similarly to other southern European countries, Portugal has a pay-as-you-go pension system. The Portuguese system calculates pensions based on the individual's contribution record and earnings. Reforms in the 2000s introduced a sustainability factor that links life expectancy to retirement age, which currently stands close to 66 years but is reviewed periodically. To receive a full pension, a person must contribute for at least 40 years. Those with fewer contributions receive proportionally less. Additionally, private pension schemes have been growing, but the majority of the population still relies primarily on the state pension system. Outside of pensions, in recent decades Portugal has seen an increasing focus on providing support for the elderly and those with disabilities. There is the Complemento Solidário para Idosos (Solidarity Allowance for the Elderly) for low-income elderly individuals. For those with disabilities, there is the Prestação Social para a Inclusão (Social Benefit for Inclusion), which aims to promote autonomy and social inclusion.
Portugal's healthcare system is a mix of both public and private provisions. The National Health Service (Serviço Nacional de Saúde, SNS) is the backbone of the public health system, providing comprehensive healthcare services to residents. Funded predominantly through general taxation, the SNS offers a broad range of services either free of charge or at subsidised rates, ensuring universal access to essential health services. Despite its inclusivity, some services under the SNS do have co-payments, although these can be waived for specific vulnerable groups, such as low-income individuals, the elderly, or children. In addition to the public system, there are also private healthcare providers and insurance schemes available, offering a variety of services and facilities. Challenges remain, particularly in ensuring an even distribution of healthcare resources across urban and rural areas.
Education system

The Portuguese education system is segmented into pre-primary, basic (primary and lower secondary), upper secondary, and higher education and comprises 12 years of compulsory education, aligning with other European countries. Basic education is compulsory and lasts for 9 years; it is further divided into three cycles, each with distinct curricular specifications. Upper secondary education in Portugal is multifaceted, allowing students to choose between the general track, which prepares them for higher education, or the vocational track, offering specialised training. Higher education in Portugal is offered by both public and private institutions and includes polytechnic education and universities. Polytechnic institutions tend to be more practice-oriented, providing undergraduate and master's courses, while universities offer a



broader range of degrees, including doctorates. Portugal is part of the Bologna Process, ensuring standardisation and recognition of its degrees across Europe, and university admissions rely on national examination scores and high school grades.
Educational reforms over the past few decades have significantly impacted the Portuguese education system. The mandatory schooling period was extended to 12 years, and there has been a concerted effort to reduce early school leaving rates, which have historically been high in comparison to other EU countries. These efforts have been extremely successful, with more young people completing upper secondary education. There has also been a sharp rise in higher education attainment.
Tax system

Taxes are generally perceived to be quite high in Portugal, and top rates tend to be at the higher end of the spectrum among Western countries. The top marginal personal income tax rate reaches 53% when we account for the mandatory solidarity contribution for higher incomes, the corporate income tax rate can reach 31.5%, one of the highest rates on business profits in Europe
, and the standard value-added tax (VAT) rate of 23% is also above the OECD average. However, average tax rates are not as high as top rates would appear to indicate and, in the end, the tax-to- GDP ratio in Portugal of around 35% (2021) is very close to the OECD average.
Aside from the VAT, the two main state revenue sources are social security and the personal income tax (PIT). As explained, social security is funded by contributions from employees, employers and the self-employed. The PIT is a progressive tax, with rates ranging from 14.5% to 53% in 2023, applied to income sources including employment, self-employment, rental and other passive incomes, as well as capital gains (although capital income is subject to a flat rate of 28%). A major source of contention, however, is the non-habitual resident regime, which allows individuals who have not been tax residents in Portugal for the previous 5 years to pay a flat tax rate of 20% on all their income for 10 years. There are also property taxes, administered at the municipality level, which tax real estate ownership and transactions, although at relatively low rates.
Labour market institutions

In Portugal, the national minimum wage is legislated at the national level and has been updated on 1 January almost every year since its initiation in 1974. It covers virtually all workers in the country - the few exceptions, such as youth and agricultural minimum wages, have tended to disappear over time. In 2023, the national minimum wage was €760 per month. The Portuguese labour code states that the minimum wage 'shall be determined [by the government] after consultation with the Standing Commission for Social Concertation', and that 'in the determination of the minimum monthly salary, the needs of the workers, the increase in the cost of living and the evolution of productivity shall be taken into consideration, among other factors', meaning that, at least partially, it is the result of a tripartite negotiation between the government, employer's associations and unions.
Collective bargaining in Portugal follows the Continental European tradition of sectoral bargaining, where firms or employer associations negotiate with unions to establish collective bargaining agreements (CBAs). These agreements set out a grid of wage floors by occupational category among other terms and conditions. The main type of CBA in Portugal is the Contrato

Colectivo de Trabalho, negotiated between one or more employers' associations and one or more unions, which is often extended to the entire workforce by the Ministry of Employment through a near-automatic extension mechanism, irrespective of the workers' union membership. Despite the relatively low levels of union membership, most employees have historically been covered by CBAs, leading to approximately 30,000 occupation-specific minimum wages, which are usually updated annually.
Employment protection legislation in Portugal is structured by a mix of international conventions, local law, notably the Labour Code, CBAs, and established labour practices. Many international organisations have historically put Portugal at the top of their strictness of employment legislation rankings, although that has largely changed since the significant reforms to labour law included in bailout negotiations with the Troika during the Great Recession. Either way, the Portuguese labour market has generally had a relatively high degree of flexibility, especially due to the prevalence of temporary contracts.
COVID economic policy response
Portugal organised a broad policy approach to mitigate the economic impact of the COVID pandemic, initiating several measures in 2020 to maintain income flow for workers and provide liquidity to businesses. These measures saw extensions or reintroductions in early 2021 and summer 2021, amidst a second national lockdown and a fourth pandemic wave, respectively. While direct aid in the form of subsidies or tax cuts was employed less than by other European countries, a significant portion of policy support was routed through guarantees and moratoria. Job retention was prioritised, with schemes such as the simplified lay-off, which covered 100% of lost earnings of affected workers up to three times the minimum wage, as well as benefits for self-employed and informal workers. Liquidity sustenance measures such as moratoria on bank loan repayments and interest-free credit for rent payments were instituted to cushion firms and households. Furthermore, large sums were allocated for state-guaranteed credit lines, alongside capital injections for private entities such as the national airline. The tax domain saw extensions to deadline payments and VAT relief in certain sectors.


3. Notes on measurement and definitions
Unit of analysis and sample:

? The sample is individuals aged between 25 and 60 inclusive, except where otherwise indicated. For figures on wages and earnings, the sample is further restricted to individuals (or households where applicable) with strictly positive wages or earnings, respectively.

? Individuals are the unit of analysis throughout. For example, for equivalised household income, each individual is allocated their respective equivalised household income, so that income is counted as many times as there are individuals aged 25-60 in the household.

? In the figure where we winsorise (Figure 40), we allocate all observations above the 99th percentile the amount equal to the 99th percentile. Otherwise, distributions are not trimmed.

Outcome definitions:

? Employment rate: the fraction of the population that is employed according to self- reported employment status. The data come from the Labour Force Survey.

? Earnings: gross annual real individual earnings (includes self-employed), among those who are employed and have strictly positive real earnings.

o The data come from the Survey on Income and Living Conditions, available for the period 2004-19, or from the Household Budget Survey, available for selected years between 1990 and 2014, depending on the figure. Survey on Income and Living Conditions data are generally of better quality, but the Household Budget Survey covers a longer period so, in some instances, data from the two surveys may be combined.

o If an employee has multiple jobs, earnings from all jobs are summed together.

o Most figures include employee taxes but not employer taxes, pension contributions or other contributions. A few figures explicitly compare trends in gross earnings with and without employer taxes.

o The period to which earnings data refers will vary across countries. In Portugal, the data on employee and self-employed earnings are obtained by asking respondents the amount they were paid over the reference year.

o Nominal earnings are converted into real terms in calendar year 2019 or financial year 2019-20 prices, using the Consumer Prices Index.

? Hours of work: usual/ typical paid hours worked per week, among those who are employed and have strictly positive real earnings. Excludes self-employed workers. The data come from the administrative personnel records.

? Wages: individual real gross hourly wages (monthly gross employee earnings divided by monthly hours worked as defined above). Excludes self-employed workers. We convert nominal wages into real terms in calendar year 2019 or financial year 2019-20 prices, using the CPI.

? Disposable household income (household equivalised income after deducting taxes and adding benefits and tax credits):

o The main measure of household income used in this report is income after direct taxes and transfers have been deducted from or added to household income.

o Income includes: usual earnings from employment, profit or loss from self- employment, state support (all benefits and tax credits), income from occupational and private pensions, investment and rental income, maintenance payments, income from educational grants and scholarships, and cash value of forms of income in kind.

o Income is net of: tax payments on income or property, social insurance contributions, and regular inter-household cash transfers paid.
o Incomes are equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale, normalised to a single individual.

Splits:

? Sex: female, male

? Education: We split education levels into three groups, based on qualifications, which map onto three International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) groups as follows:

Qualification obtained
ISCED
Group
Up to lower secondary education
ISCED 0-2
Low
Up to short-cycle tertiary education
ISCED 3-5
Medium
Above bachelor's degree or equivalent
ISCED 6-8
High

? Household type: Single without dependent children; single with dependent children; couples without dependent children; couples with dependent children; other. Adult children go in the 'other' category. A dependent child is a child aged 0-17.


4. Individual employment and earnings
This section looks at trends in individual employment and earnings. With respect to earnings, we first look separately at hourly wages and hours worked, before bringing them together in a set of charts on earnings inequality. Due to a lack of reliable data on hours worked for the self- employed in Portugal, we restrict the analysis of wages and hours to employees but include both employees and the self-employed in the analysis on total earnings. Finally, we look separately at self-employed individuals.

4.1 Trends in employment

Figure 1 shows that since 1992, Portugal has seen sustained growth in the employment rate of prime-aged (25-60-year-old) women, from 66% to 82% in 2020, and a rate anchored at around 90% for prime-aged men such that, by 2020, the prime-age employment rate gender gap had reduced to 5%, from 25% in 1992. During the period of the Great Recession, there was a very sharp decline in employment rates across the board, which took as long as a decade to recover from (e.g., for prime-aged males, employment fell by 12 percentage points between 2008 and 2013, only recovering to pre-crisis levels in 2019). The dynamics was very similar for older workers (aged 61-74), at lower levels, although female employment did not increase as much.

Employment rates among young people (16-24) have declined for both men and women since 1992, due to exceptional progress in schooling levels, from increases in the school leaving age to the expansion of higher education. Either way, youth employment has remained very low throughout time, when compared to prime-age employment or other countries, suffering an even more severe shock during the Great Recession (a decline of 18 percentage points for young males and 10 percentage points for young females).

Figure 1. Employment rates by age and sex, over time
Male, 16-24	Male, 25-60	Male, 61-74
Female, 16-24	Female, 25-60	Female, 61-74
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


Year
Source: Portuguese Labour Force Survey.

Figure 2 shows the decline in youth employment across the years, for both men and women, due to the increase in the school leaving age and levels of education. It also illustrates the sharp rise in employment of prime-aged women over time. On the other hand, for men above 25 there was no significant change in employment rates over the years, with the exception of 2010, when employment was at its lowest due to the financial crisis.
Figure 2. Employment rates over life cycle by sex, selected years




100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Female


100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Male



Age	Age

Source: Portuguese Labour Force Survey.

We now focus on individuals in their prime working years (aged 25-60). Since the 2000s, there has been a significant development of education in Portugal. The school leaving age was raised to 18 in 2009, with a strong expansion of upper secondary as well as higher education (a rise of around 20 percentage points in the share of individuals with each of those levels of education).
This upsurge in schooling was compensated by a sharp decline in share of individuals with lower secondary education or less, from 81% in 1992 to 44% in 2020 (Figure 3).
These trends have been similar for both men and women (Figure 4), although the share of women with higher education has risen significantly more than the share of men, compensated by the decline in the share of women with lower secondary education or less. While in 1992 there was virtually no gender difference in schooling, in 2020 there was a 10 percentage point gap in higher education attainment rates between women and men.



Figure 3. Educational attainment over time

ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Source: Portuguese Labour Force Survey.

Figure 4. Educational attainment by sex, over time
Male: ISCED 0-2	Male: ISCED 3-5	Male: ISCED 6-8
Female: ISCED 0-2	Female: ISCED 3-5	Female: ISCED 6-8
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Source: Portuguese Labour Force Survey.

Figure 5 shows how trends in employment have differed by educational background. After recovering from a recession in the early 1990s, employment rates were stable across education levels, although slightly decreasing over time. Again, that is with the exception of the Great Recession period, which affected employment across the board, but the less educated most

severely. It is also worth noting that, while a college degree granted near-immunity from the economic crisis in the 1990s, during the 2008 financial crisis higher-educated individuals, now rather greater in number than before, were almost as vulnerable as anyone else.
Out of all gender-education groups, women with lower secondary education or less were by far the most disenfranchised, with an employment rate of 56% in 1992, while all other groups were above 80% that year (Figure 6). However, that was also the only group with positive growth between 1992 and 2020, reaching 68% in the latter year. On the other hand, uneducated men were the most affected by the financial crisis, with a drop in employment of 14 percentage points from which they had still not recovered in 2020.
Figure 5. Employment rates by education, over time
ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8
100


90


80


70


60


50


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Source: Portuguese Labour Force Survey.



Figure 6. Employment rates by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0-2	Male: ISCED 3-5	Male: ISCED 6-8
Female: ISCED 0-2	Female: ISCED 3-5	Female: ISCED 6-8
100

90

80

70

60

50


Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Source: Portuguese Labour Force Survey.

Between the 1990s and the mid-2000s, the unemployment rate in Portugal fluctuated with the business cycle at relatively low levels, around 4-6%. However, the economic catastrophe that was the Great Recession caused an unprecedented surge in unemployment to all-time-record numbers. The unemployment rate reached 17% in 2013 (Figure 7), at the peak of the crisis, only recovering to its pre-crisis levels a decade after its beginning. The share of unemployed that are considered long-term has been generally high over the years, around 50-60% and reaching as high as 70% during the crisis.1





















1 For more on the particularities of the Portuguese unemployment rate, see Blanchard and Jimeno (1995) or Blanchard and Portugal (2001).

Figure 7. Unemployment rate by duration of unemployment over time
 Short-term  Long-term
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Unemployment rate is calculated as the fraction of the labour force aged 25-60, split between short-term (less than 1 year) and long-term (more than 1 year) duration of unemployment.
Source: Portuguese Labour Force Survey.


4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)

Real median hourly wages grew steadily during the late 1980s and 1990s, rose at a slower rate until 2009 - especially for men - and suffered a significant drop during the Great Recession, which took long to recover from - growth only picked up again in the late 2010s (Figure 8).
Overall, the median hourly wage in Portugal grew by just 50% in real terms over 33 years, especially due to the prolonged wage stagnation of the first two decades of the twenty-first century. That stagnation, however, was much more pronounced for men, as was the impact of the Great Recession, leading to a substantial reduction of the gender wage gap, from 35% to 20%.

Still, this masks significant heterogeneity across gender-education groups (Figure 9). During the 1980s and 1990s the strong demand and short supply of skilled workers led to a very significant rise in the wages of higher-educated workers (ISCED 6-8), as well as males with upper secondary education (ISCED 3-5). But as more and more workers achieved greater qualifications, together with a stagnating economy, those gains started to recede. The wages of higher-educated men, in particular, saw a 50% real rise between 1986 and 1995, which was fully reversed by 2015. At the opposite end of the spectrum, the wages of uneducated (ISCED 0-2) females experienced consistent growth across the years.



Figure 8. Median real hourly wage among employees, overall and by sex, over time
Male	Female	All
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5


Year


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive wages. Wages are in 2019 prices.
Source: Personnel Records.

Figure 9. Median real hourly wage among employees, by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0-2	Male: ISCED 3-5	Male: ISCED 6-8
Female: ISCED 0-2	Female: ISCED 3-5	Female: ISCED 6-8
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0


Year


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive wages education. Wages are in 2019 prices.
Source: Personnel Records.

Figure 10 shows median wages over the life cycle by sex and education, for different time periods. Those with lower levels of education see a flatter wage profile over the life cycle, while individuals with higher levels of education experience faster growth over the years. However, while wages peaked at around 45 years of age during the late 1980s and early 1990s - for all levels of

education - in recent years wages have demonstrated continuous growth across the life cycle. While the gender wage gap is trivial at the beginning of individuals' careers, growth is much more significant for men than for women.
Figure 10. Median real hourly wage among employees over lifecycle, by sex and education
Male	Female
1986-87 to 1990-91

ISCD 0-2
20

16

12

8

4

0

ISCED 3-5
20	20

16	16

12	12

8	8

4	4

0	0

ISCED 6-8






Age

Age

Age





ISCD 0-2
20

16

12

8

4

0

2014-15 to 2018-19
ISCED 3-5
20	20

16	16

12	12

8	8

4	4

0	0



ISCED 6-8






Age

Age

Age




Note: Sample is individuals with strictly positive wages. Wages are shown in 2019 constant-wage terms. Five-year smoothing across ages has been applied.
Source: Personnel Records.

Figures 11 and 12 plot trends in wage inequality using the Gini coefficient, the 90:10 ratio and the 50:10 ratio. Wage inequality in Portugal can be very clearly split into three periods: during the late 1980s and early 1990s wage inequality increased sharply, mostly at the top of the distribution; between the mid-1990s and the mid-2000s, inequality stagnated at the top, with slight fluctuations; and from the mid-2000s, inequality started to rapidly fall, mainly due to a



compression of the distribution at the bottom. The dynamics was similar across genders, although inequality among females had been consistently lower than among males.2

Figure 11. Gini coefficient of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time
All	Male	Female
0.37

0.35

0.33

0.31

0.29

0.27

0.25


Year

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive hourly wages.
Source: Personnel Records.



























2 The historical path of income and wage inequality in Portugal is analysed in detail in Oliveira (2023b).





5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

All: 90:10 ratio	Male: 90:10 ratio	Female: 90:10 ratio
All: 50:10 ratio	Male: 50:10 ratio	Female: 50:10 ratio






2.4

2.2

2.0

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2



Year


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive hourly wages.
Source: Personnel Records.

Figure 13 looks in more detail at changes in hourly wages across the wage distribution. The period between 1986 and 1994 was one of sharply rising inequality. While workers at the bottom of the distribution saw their wages grow by little more than 1% a year, the higher up they were in the distribution, the greater was their wage growth, with workers at the top experiencing growth rates of 5% a year. Wages also grew faster for men than for women. Between 1994 and 2006 wages were nearly stagnant with annualised growth rates of around 1.5% for women and 1% for men, marginally decreasing across the distribution. While average wage growth was still very low after 2006, mainly because of the Great Recession, between that year and 2019 there was a sharp reduction in inequality as the wages of workers at the bottom grew at around 2% a year, while workers at the top experienced no wage growth at all. Since 1994, women's wages have also been growing faster than men's wages.



Figure 13. Annualised growth in hourly wages among employees by wage percentile, overall and by sex, selected periods
6	Male	Female	6	Male	Female


4	4


2	2



0	0
Percentile

6	Male	Female



Percentile



4


2


0
Percentile

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive hourly wages.
Source: Personnel Records.


4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)

Figure 14 shows that average hours worked among employees decreased until 1999, especially due to the working week reforms of 1991 (from 48 to 44 hours) and 1996 (from 44 to 40 hours), and have remained very stable since then, at around 39 hours per week.3 However, if we look at different gender-education groups (Figure 15), we see that there was significant growth in hours worked for higher-educated women, which was roughly compensated by the decrease in hours of less-educated men.







3 For more on the working week reform, see Raposo and van Ours (2010) or Asai, Lopes and Tondini (2023).

Male	Female	All
46

44

42

40

38

36

34

32


Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60.
Source: Personnel Records.

Figure 15. Mean hours worked among employees, by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0-2	Male: ISCED 3-5	Male: ISCED 6-8
Female: ISCED 0-2	Female: ISCED 3-5	Female: ISCED 6-8
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32


Year


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60.
Source: Personnel Records.
Figure 16 shows the large drop in hours worked between the late 1980s and the 2000s due to the consecutive working week reforms, especially at the lower half of the wage distribution, since higher-earning employees were already working fewer hours. In the top half of the distribution, the drop was clearly smaller for women, with those at the very top even experiencing positive



growth. Since the beginning of the twenty-first century, hours worked have shown almost no change across the distribution.

Figure 16. Annualised growth in mean hours worked among employees by hourly wage ventile, overall and by sex, selected years

Male	Female
5%


0%


-5%


-10%


-15%

Hourly wage ventile
Male	Female
5%


0%


-5%


-10%


-15%

Hourly wage ventile

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60.
Source: Personnel Records.


4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self- employed)

We now turn to trends in individual earnings, which reflect the combination of trends in hours worked and hourly wages for employees as well as the self-employed. Before we examine inequality statistics, Figure 17 shows the general stagnation of median earnings over the last three decades. With the reduction in hours worked being compensated by an increase in hourly

wages and the increase in female wages being compensated by the decrease in male wages, median income in Portugal has been fluctuating between €9,000 and €10,000 per year since 1990. The earnings growth during the 1990s and the 2000s was followed in each case by a recession, which cut individual earnings, helping maintain median earnings at their stationary level between €9,000 and €10,000 per year.

Still, there was a sharp reduction in the gender earnings gap - while women used to earn nearly half of what men earned in 1990, they now make 85 cents for each euro a man makes - as well as a sharp drop in the higher education premium, with men, in particular, experiencing a very sharp drop in their real earnings from the 1990s (Figure 18).

Figure 17. Median real gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time
Male	Female	All
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5


Year

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices.
Source: Household Budget Survey (1990, 1995, 2000), Survey on Income and Living Conditions (2004-19).



Figure 18. Median real gross individual earnings, by sex and education, over time

Male: ISCED 0-2	Male: ISCED 3-5	Male: ISCED 6-8
Female: ISCED 0-2	Female: ISCED 3-5	Female: ISCED 6-8
30

25

20

15

10

5

0


Year




Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices.
Source: Household Budget Survey (1990, 1995, 2000), Survey on Income and Living Conditions (2004-19).

Figure 19 shows that overall earnings inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient has shown similar behaviour to wage inequality. In just the first 5 years of the 1990s it rose by 2.4 points, stayed at around 0.36 until the mid-2000s, and then began a sharp fall, reaching 0.28 in 2019.4

While inequality among women, which was much higher than male inequality by 1990, stayed high until the mid-2000s, inequality among men rose dramatically, driving the initial rise in inequality - even with the sharp reduction of the gender earnings gap. Since the mid-2000s, however, female inequality has started to decrease much faster than male, standing 3 points below male inequality by 2019.

Figure 19. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time












4 Other countries have produced Gini coefficient figures of gross individual earnings and total employer cost, but that was not possible in this case due to data unavailability.


0.40
0.38
0.36
0.34
0.32
0.30
0.28
0.26
0.24

All	Male	Female


Year


Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings.
Source: Household Budget Survey (1990, 1995, 2000), Survey on Income and Living Conditions (2004-19).
Figure 20 shows the decline of earnings inequality in Portugal after the mid-2000s, as captured by both the 90:10 and 50:10 earnings ratios. In 2004, the median income was twice the income of someone at the 10th percentile of the earnings distribution. While this illustrates an already very concentrated lower half of the income distribution, it was still able to narrow further, with the median income being just 58% above the income at the 10th percentile by 2019. At the same time, there was also a strong reduction in inequality at the top. In 2004 someone in the 90th percentile of the earnings distribution earned five times what someone bottom earned - that figure was just
3.3 in 2019. This means that top earnings went from 2.5 times to 2 times as much as the median earnings over time. Inequality fell, at the top and at the bottom, both for women and men, albeit more so for women.


Figure 20. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time All: 90:10 ratio	Male: 90:10 ratio	Female: 90:10 ratio
All: 50:10 ratio	Male: 50:10 ratio	Female: 50:10 ratio


6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5 
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

2.5
2.4
2.3
2.2
2.1
2.0
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5



Year


Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings.
Source: Survey on Income and Living Conditions.
Figure 21 shows the growth in earnings across the distribution. During the first period we can observe the massive decline in the gender earnings gap - while women experienced very significant earnings growth across the distribution, especially at the bottom and at the top, most men saw no growth at all in their earnings between 1990 and 2000, with only those at the very top enjoying a sizeable increase in their earnings. On the other hand, between 2004 and 2019 we can see a very large decrease in inequality for both genders, but especially for women. While individuals at the bottom decile saw income growth of the order of 5% a year, those at the top of the distribution actually saw their earnings decrease over these 15 years.5















5 Other countries have produced annualised growth in gross earnings and employer cost by earnings percentile figures, but that was not possible in this case due to data unavailability.

Figure 21. Annualised growth in gross earnings by earnings percentile, overall and sex, selected periods
10	Male	Female	All	10	Male	Female	All


5	5


0	0



-5

Earnings percentile

-5

Earnings percentile


Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings.
Source: Survey on Income and Living Conditions.


4.5	Self-employment

There has been a steady decline in self-employment in Portugal since the late 1990s, from around 23% during the 1990s to around 12% in the 2010s (Figure 22). The decline was mostly driven by the solo self-employed, although the share of other self-employed also decreased over this period. The drop was mainly concentrated among those with less education (Figure 23), especially for women, while the shares of self-employment for those with higher qualifications remained stable throughout. Figure 24 shows that self-employment is highly concentrated among the workers at the bottom of the earnings distribution. Moreover, the decline in self- employment after the mid-2000s was mostly above the 20th income percentile - only during the 2010s did self-employment also decrease at the bottom.


Figure 22. Share of employees and self-employed workers, over time
All self-employed	Solo self-employed
Other self-employed	Employees (right axis)
25%





85%



20%

80%



15%

75%



10%

70%


5%	65%

0%	60%

Year



Note: Individuals aged 25-60. 'Solo self-employed' are self-employed without employees, 'other self-employed' includes self-employed with employees and family workers.
Source: Portuguese Labour Force Survey.

Figure 23. Share self-employed by sex and education, over time
Male ISCED 0-2	Male ISCED 3-4	Male ISCED 5-8	Male All Female ISCED 0-2	Female ISCED 3-4	Female ISCED 5-8	Female All
30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

Year


Note: Individuals aged 25-60. 'Solo self-employed' are self-employed without employees, 'other self-employed' includes self-employed with employees and family workers.
Source: Portuguese Labour Force Survey.
Figure 24. Share self-employed by percentile of individual earnings, selected years
2004-2006	2011-2013	2017-2019
50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%
0	5  10  15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
Percentile



Note: Individuals 25-60 years of age. Five-year smoothing has been applied.
Source: Survey on Income and Living Conditions.

5. Labour market institutions
This section looks at labour market institutions that affect earnings and incomes: minimum wages and collective bargaining, self-employment and social insurance. As in most of the report, all analysis is restricted to workers aged 25-60.

5.1 Minimum wage and unions

The bite of the minimum wage presented a U-shaped trajectory between 1986 and 2019, as shown in Figure 25. During the 1980s and 1990s the real value of the minimum wage hardly changed, so the rising level of wages led to a strong decline in its importance in the labour market. Until the mid-2000s the bite of the minimum wage was stagnant, but since 2006 its real value has been rapidly rising - even with the government freezing its value during the Great Recession. With sluggish growth of the median wage during the first two decades of the twenty- first century, its bite rose significantly - by 2019, the minimum wage was above 60% of the median.6

Figure 25. Bite of the minimum wage, over time


30%	0.70



25%	0.65



20%	0.60



15%	0.55



10%	0.50


Year



Note: Individuals aged 25-60. The figure presents the share of employees with a wage less than 1.2 times the minimum wage (blue line, left-hand side). The yellow line (right-hand side) is the ratio of the minimum wage to the median wage. Source: Personnel Records.
Figure 26 shows union density and collective bargaining agreement coverage for all employees in Portugal since the 1970s. After the democratic revolution of 1974, Portugal displayed very high

6 For more on the minimum wage in Portugal and its impact along the wage distribution, see Oliveira (2023a).



levels of union density, above 70%, but this fell sharply during the 1970s and 1980s, and more slowly thereafter, reaching a remarkably low level in more recent years, at just 15% in 2016. While the Portuguese decline was quite extraordinary, a fall in union density has been observed in several Continental European countries, attributed to the extensive collective contract coverage that has rendered unions pointless from the perspective of the individual worker. In fact, coverage by CBAs has remained high in Portugal in recent decades.7

Figure 26. Union density and fraction of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements, over time
Union density	Collective contract coverage
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


Year


Note: The sample is all employees. The denominator is the number of employees.
Source: OECD/AIAS ICTWSS Database.


5.2 Taxes and benefits

Benefits as a proportion of gross income increased significantly in the wake of the Great Recession, especially in the lower half of the income distribution (Figure 27), as unemployment increased significantly, and many families had to resort to state benefits as a main source of income. For the bottom quartile, the average share of benefits in gross income reached almost 30% at the height of the crisis. Since then, however, the importance of benefits in household incomes has been steadily decreasing. In the upper half of the income distribution, there was a slight decrease in the share of benefits over time.







7 For more on unionisation and collective bargaining in Portugal, see Addison, Portugal and Vilares (2022) and Card and Cardoso (2022), respectively.

Figure 27. Benefits as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile
    Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile 35%
30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

Direct taxes as a share of gross income have remained relatively steady across the income distribution, increasing between 2011 and 2014 as a result of tax hikes that the government imposed in response to the public debt crisis (Figure 28). However, the increase in the tax burden was concentrated at the top of the distribution and this continued even during the recovery period - direct taxes reached 27% of gross income for the top quartile in 2019, from 23% in 2007. On the other hand, the bottom quartile of the distribution saw a sudden increase in direct taxes as a share of gross income in 2010-11, which faded relatively quickly.

Figure 28. Direct taxes as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile
    Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile 35%
30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.



Over time, benefits have decreased and direct taxes have increased, as a share of gross income, at the top of the distribution. Disposable income for the top quartile went from 77% to 73% of gross income (Figure 29), and from 67% to 61% of gross income including employer social security contributions (Figure 30), between 2007 and 2019. There have also been decreases for the rest of the distribution, but they were less pronounced.

Figure 29. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile
    Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile 100%
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%
70%
65%
60%
55%
50%
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

Figure 30. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income and employer social security contributions, by net household income quartile
    Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile 100%
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%
70%
65%
60%
55%
50%
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

6. Household incomes
This section looks at trends in household incomes. We start by looking at trends in household composition and the degree of assortative matching, which partly determine household earnings. We then compare trends in household earnings and household disposable income for working households, drawing out the role of the tax and transfer system over time. Finally, we show a set of charts on trends in household income inequality across all households (including those where no one is in work).

Trends in household income inequality are driven by earnings inequality, patterns of assortative matching and other trends in family composition, and the tax and benefit system. This section will first consider patterns in household composition, and how individual earnings inequality translates into household earnings inequality. It then looks at household disposable income, taking account of taxes and benefits, and looking at individuals from all households rather than just workers or working households.

6.1 Trends in household composition

In recent decades there has been a 10 percentage point decline in marriage/cohabitation rates, from 80% to 70% (Figure 31). This was driven first by individuals with medium to high levels of education (ISCED 3-5 and 6-8) - with persons with college degrees (ISCED 6-8) seeing a drop of 12 percentage points in just the first decade - and later by the less educated (ISCED 0-2), although the latter remain the ones with the highest marriage/cohabitation rates. The share of people with medium levels of education (ISCED 3-5) who are married/cohabiting actually went up by 9 percentage points between 1995 and 2014, although that change is likely compositional since educational attainment has increased sharply.
Figure 31. Share married/cohabiting, overall and by education, over time ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8	All
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50


Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Source: Household Budget Survey.



Figure 32 shows a similar pattern when looking at individual earnings, rather than education. For men, the likelihood of being in a couple has declined over time - in 1990, marriage/cohabitation rates were above 90% for men above the 30th percentile of the income distribution, while in 2014 rates were below that figure across the distribution, with a very sharp drop for non-working men. Still, the likelihood of men having a partner who works increased significantly. For women, marriage/cohabitation rates have remained stable at around 70% over time, across the entire distribution, although there has also been a significant drop for non-working women.

A clear gender difference has persisted over time: while the likelihood of being in a couple is uncorrelated with income for women, high-earning men have a much higher likelihood of being in a couple than lower-earning men. Figure 33 displays very clearly the high degree of assortative matching in the marriage market: the position of married/cohabiting men and women in the income distribution is almost directly proportional to their partners' position, and this has not changed through the years. The combined impact of these phenomena is to push up inequality in household earnings.

Figure 32. Share married/cohabiting and share with working partner, by sex and individual gross earnings percentile, selected years
Working: Married/cohabiting	Working: Has a working partner
 Non-working: Married/cohabiting	 Non-working: Has a working partner


100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%



15 2025303540455055606570 7580859095
Male gross earnings percentile



1990, Females






15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
Female gross earnings percentile



100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%



15 2025303540455055606570 7580859095
Male gross earnings percentile



2014, Females








15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
Female gross earnings percentile

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Married/cohabitating also includes civil partnerships. The proportion with a working partner is conditional on being married/cohabiting.
Source: Household Budget Survey.



Figure 33. Mean gross earnings percentile of partner/spouse by individual's gross earnings percentile, selected years



85	85

75	75

65	65

55	55

45	45

35	35

25	25

Female gross earnings percentile




Male gross earnings percentile



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 (with strictly positive earnings for defining earnings percentiles). Married/cohabitating also includes civil partnerships. Mean earnings of partners are plotted as five-point moving averages across the earnings distribution.
Source: Household Budget Survey.



Looking at family structure more broadly, the share of prime working-aged adults who are single without children increased from 4% in 1990 to 10% in 2014, and that has been largely compensated by the decline of 7 percentage points in the share of childless couples (Figure 34). The share of single parents has also increased, from 3% to 6%. The rising share of single adults occurred especially during the last decade of the sample, with a combined increase of 7 percentage points just between 2005 and 2014. Figure 35 shows that the decline of the share of individuals who are in a couple occurred mostly for men, especially the higher-educated (a decline of 20 percentage points in single adults with/without children). On the other hand, the share of women with low to medium education (ISCED 0-2 and 3-5) who are in a couple was stable throughout (women with higher education did experience a decrease of 10 percentage points).



Figure 34. Share of individuals by position in the household, over time
 Single, no children  Single, children  Couple, no children  Couple, children  Other 100%
90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. 'Single, children' and 'Couple, children' refer to children aged 0-18. Parents of adult children are categorised as 'other'. Adult children and parents of adult children are categorised as 'other'.
Source: Household Budget Survey.

Figure 35. Share of individuals by position in the household, by sex and education, over time
 Single, no children  Single, children  Couple, no children  Couple, children  Other
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%


Year	Year

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%



100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Year

Year





Year	Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. 'Single, children' and 'Couple, children' refer to children aged 0-18. Parents of adult children are categorised as 'other'. Adult children and parents of adult children are categorised as 'other'.
Source: Household Budget Survey.


6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households

The share of individuals in a working household has seen a slight decrease in recent decades, from 93% in 1990 to 89% in 2014, as illustrated by Figure 36. In particular, the share of individuals with low levels of education (ISCED 0-2) in a working household decreased by 6 percentage points between 2000 and 2014, although this phenomenon might be in part compositional, due to increasing levels of educational attainment. Still, the decrease in the share of individuals in a working household is also observed for more-educated individuals.


Figure 36. Share of individuals in a working household, overall and by education, over time ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8	All
100%


95%


90%


85%


80%


75%


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work.
Source: Household Budget Survey.

We now consider how all the trends above combined to explain trends in household earnings, and how interactions with the tax and benefit system generate trends in disposable household income. Figure 37 shows the slightly positive trend in gross household earnings and disposable household income in recent years for working and non-working households. The trend in disposable household income is similar to that for earnings, but smoother during the Great Recession, as tax and benefit changes have smoothed out economic shocks over the years.8 However, the gap in disposable income between working and non-working households has steadily decreased, which could potentially have an inequality-reducing effect.


















8 For more on how redistributive policy smoothed movements in disposable income in the wake of the Great Recession, see Farinha Rodrigues and Andrade (2019).

Figure 37. Median real gross household earnings and disposable household income among working households, over time
Gross household earnings (working HHs) Disposable household income (working HHs) Disposable household income (non-working HHs)
14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. For median gross household earnings we have restricted the sample to those with strictly positive household earnings. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Source: Survey on Income and Living Conditions.



Figure 38 shows that, between 2007 and 2019, there was a very different behaviour of growth across the upper and lower halves of the household income/earnings distribution. In that period, households in the lower half of the distribution transversally saw an annualised growth in gross as well as disposable income of 1% - quite high, compared to previous decades. In the upper half of the distribution, however, income growth decreased with income percentile. And the tax and benefit system made it so that households in the top 20% of the distribution actually saw a real decline in their disposable income since 2007 - in the top decile, disposable household incomes declined by 1% every year.
Figure 38. Annualised growth in real gross household earnings and household disposable income for working households, by percentile, 2007-19


1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

Percentile

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. For the household earnings series we have restricted the sample to those with strictly positive earnings. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Source: Survey on Income and Living Conditions.


6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households

This final section brings together the trends shown above to look at inequality in disposable household incomes across all households. Figure 39 shows that the median real disposable household income in Portugal rose by 80% over the course of the last three decades, equivalent to about 2% a year. But that growth was completely driven by lower-educated households (ISCED 0-2). While lower-educated households saw a steady increase in their real income over the years, from €4,400 a year in 1990 to €7,800 in 2019 (albeit with a significant deceleration during the Great Recession), households with at least one member with a college degree had, in 2019, a median income that was just 6% higher than in 1990. During the 1990s there was a very strong increase in the college premium, with the median real annual earnings of those households rising from €14,000 to €20,000 between 1990 and 2005. However, their real income has been falling sharply since then - with a remarkably severe drop during the Great Recession - such that, by 2019, earnings of college-educated households were almost the same as they were three decades before.

Figure 39. Median real disposable household income for all households, overall and by education, over time
ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8	All
25


20


15


10


5


0


Year



Note:. Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Incomes are in 2019 prices. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Source: Household Budget Survey (1990, 1995, 2000), Survey on Income and Living Conditions (2004-19).

Figures 40 and 41 show that measures of inequality in disposable household incomes - including the Gini coefficient, the top 1% share and the 90:10 ratio - have been decreasing since 2004, especially during the Great Recession. Inequality at the top of the distribution, as measured by the 90:50 ratio and the top 1% share, clearly display a very significant drop during the Great Recession - related to the fall in the earnings of higher educated individuals - and a more moderate decrease after that. Inequality at the bottom of the household income distribution (relative poverty and 50:10 ratio) was more stable than inequality at the top, with a slightly declining trend over the past decades - both measures saw a more pronounced decrease following the compression of the median wage during the Great Recession, which was quickly reversed during the subsequent decade.

Overall, the Great Recession was a turning point in regard to household income inequality in Portugal. After more than a decade of rising income inequality, especially at the top, the severe compression of incomes at the upper half of the distribution caused inequality not just to fall sharply, but to reverse its trend.



Figure 40. Gini, relative poverty and top 1% share of net household income for all households, over time
Gini	Gini (winsorised)	Relative poverty	Top 1%'s share (right axis)
40%	8%

35%	7%

30%	6%

25%	5%

20%	4%

15%	3%

10%	2%

5%	1%

0%	0%


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with less than 60% of contemporaneous median income before the deduction of housing costs. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. The winsorised Gini series is winsorised at 99th percentile.
Source: Household Budget Survey (1990, 1995, 2000), Survey on Income and Living Conditions (2004-19).

Figure 41. Percentile ratios of disposable household incomes for all households, over time
90:10 ratio	50:10 ratio (right axis)	90:50 ratio (right axis)
6




3.3





5	2.8




4	2.3




3	1.8


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Source: Household Budget Survey (1990, 1995, 2000), Survey on Income and Living Conditions (2004-19).


7. Immigration
Portugal has a quite low immigrant population and, while it has risen over the past few years, the rise has been minor compared to other European countries. Broadly speaking, a third to a half of the immigrant population are European migrants, especially high-skilled eastern European individuals from countries such as Romania and Ukraine, but also older individuals from central and northern Europe; quarter are African migrants, especially from Portuguese-speaking countries such as Cape Verde and Angola; a quarter are Brazilian migrants; and there is also a small population of Asian, especially Chinese and more recently Indian, migrants. Between 2009 and 2019, the share of migrants in the Portuguese adult population rose from 8% to 11% (Figure 42).9

Figure 42. Share of migrants in the population 25-60 years of age, 2008-10 12%

10%


8%


6%


4%


2%


0%


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A migrant is defined as someone who was born outside Portugal.
Source: Survey on Income and Living Conditions.
The share of migrants is relatively constant across the Portuguese income distribution (Figure 43), but there is a slight overrepresentation of immigrants in the upper deciles of the distribution in recent years, likely driven by older, richer central and northern Europeans moving to Portugal closer to retirement to enjoy the tax benefits that the country provides to those types of immigrants.




9 For more on immigration in Portugal, see Góis and Marques (2018).

Figure 43. Share of immigrants in the population, across the disposable income distribution, 2008-10 and 2017-19

12%

2008-10	2017-19



10%


8%


6%


4%


2%


0%
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Decile



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A migrant is defined as someone who was born outside Portugal. Individuals with zero or less earnings are excluded.
Source: Survey on Income and Living Conditions.
On average, immigrants are quite similar to Portuguese natives in most outcomes, with the exception of higher-education attainment, where migrants largely surpass the attainment of natives (Figure 44). This is likely due to the richer central and northern European migrants, but also due to the eastern Europeans who often come to the country with higher education levels than the natives.



Figure 44. Outcomes of migrants relative to natives, and their children, ages 25-60, 2019 160%
140%

120%

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%





 2008-10   2017-19


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A migrant is defined as someone who was born outside Portugal. Household incomes and earnings have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. A ratio equal to 100% implies that immigrants and natives have the same level of that outcome. A ratio greater than 100% indicates that the corresponding level for immigrants is higher than for natives.
Source: Survey on Income and Living Conditions.

8. References

Addison, J. T., Portugal, P. and Vilares, H., 2022. Union membership density and wages: The role of worker, firm, and job-title heterogeneity. Journal of Econometrics, 233(2), 612-32.
Asai, K., Lopes, M. and Tondini, A., 2023. Firm-level effects of reductions in working hours. Mimeo. https://bit.ly/463WIRe
Blanchard, O. and Jimeno, J., 1995. Structural unemployment: Spain versus Portugal. American Economic Review, 85(2), 212-18.
Blanchard, O. and Portugal, P., 2001. What hides behind an unemployment rate: Comparing Portuguese and U.S. labor markets. American Economic Review, 91(1), 187-207.
Card, D. and Cardoso, A. R., 2022. Wage flexibility under sectoral bargaining. Journal of the European Economic Association, 20(5), 2013-61.
Farinha Rodrigues, C. and Andrade, I., 2019. Redistribution policy and inequality in Portugal
(2008-2017). Notas Económicas, Faculty of Economics, University of Coimbra, issue 50, pp. 23-42.
Góis, P. and Marques, J. C., 2018. Retrato de um Portugal migrante: a evolução da emigração, da imigração e do seu estudo nos últimos 40 anos. e-cadernos CES .
Oliveira, C., 2023a. The minimum wage and the wage distribution in Portugal. Labour Economics, forthcoming. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.labeco.2023.102459
Oliveira, C., 2023b. The turbulent history of income and wage inequality in Portugal, 1974-2020. Mimeo. https://bit.ly/45XDoFv
Raposo, P. and van Ours, J., 2010. How working time reduction affects jobs and wages.
Economics Letters, 106(1), 61-3.


9. Data appendix
All figures and statistics in this paper were produced with recourse to one of the following four datasets unless explicitly stated otherwise:
* Personnel Records/Quadros de Pessoal (QP): QP is an annual mandatory survey of all private establishments in Portugal with at least one wage earner, collected by the Ministry of Labour to monitor compliance with labour law provisions, ensuring its accuracy. This incredibly rich longitudinal matched employer-employee dataset of the full population of private employees in the country contains an extensive list of variables on firms, establishments and workers since 1986 (except for 1990 and 2001, when the data were not available). The sample used here contains all employees aged 25-60 between 1986 and 2019.
* Labour Force Survey (LFS): The LFS is a household survey conducted quarterly by Statistics Portugal (INE), with the goal of characterising the Portuguese labour market. It surveys around 40,000 individuals every quarter, mainly following Eurostat procedures and definitions. The sample used here contains all individuals aged 25-60 surveyed in the first quarter of each year, between 1992 and 2020.
* Household Budget Survey (HBS): The HBS is a household survey conducted roughly every 5 years by Statistics Portugal (INE) in order to provide information on households' budgets and expenditures. It was conducted in 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005, 2009 and 2014 and surveyed 25,000-50,000 individuals depending on the year. The sample used here contains all individuals aged 25-60 surveyed between 1995 and 2014, often focusing solely on working individuals.
* Survey on Income and Living Conditions (SILC): The SILC (or EU-SILC) is a household survey conducted by Eurostat with the aim of collecting comparable data on income, poverty, social exclusion and living conditions across EU countries. It surveyed around 10,000 individuals per year in earlier years, and closer to 30,000 individuals more recently. The sample used here contains all individuals aged 25-60 between 2004 and 2019, often focusing solely on working individuals.

10. Appendix: 25-74 age group

Figure 45. Annualised growth in hourly wages among employees by wage percentile, overall and by sex, selected periods
6	Male	Female	6	Male	Female


4	4


2	2



0	0
Percentile

6	Male	Female



Percentile



4


2


0
Percentile





Note: Sample is employees aged 25-74. We do not include the bottom and top 1% when calculating the wage percentiles.



Figure 46. Annualised growth in mean hours worked among employees by hourly wage ventile, overall and by sex, selected years

Male	Female

4%
2%
0%
-2%
-4%
-6%
-8%
-10%
-12%
-14%




6%

4%

2%

0%

-2%

-4%

-6%

-8%

















Hourly wage ventile
Male	Female
















Hourly wage ventile


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-74. We do not include the bottom and top 1% of the gender specific wage distribution. We pool data from across the three years to obtain hourly wage for each 3-year period.
Figure 47. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time, ages 25-74


0.40
0.38
0.36
0.34
0.32
0.30
0.28
0.26
0.24

All	Male	Female


Year
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-74. We exclude the bottom and top 1% of the gender-specific gross earnings distribution.



Figure 48. Annualised growth in gross earnings by earnings percentile, overall and sex, selected periods

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Male	Female	All












Earnings percentile

13


8


3


-2

Male	Female	All












Earnings percentile



Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-74. We exclude those in the bottom and top 5% of the gender-specific wage distribution.



















































































































































lnstitute for Fiscal Studies

Country Studies: Inequalities in Europe and North America
A parallel study to the IFS Deaton Review

Brindusa Anghel Olympia Bover Laura Hospido Julio Ortega Ana Regil





To be or not to be (employed): two decades of fluctuating earnings and
income inequality in
Spain








To be or not to be (employed): two decades of fluctuating earnings and income inequality in Spain*

Brindusa Anghel	Olympia Bover	Laura Hospido	Julio Ortega	Ana V. Regil



This draft: April 20, 2024


Abstract
   This paper offers a descriptive overview of the evolution of individual earnings and household income inequality in Spain in the last two decades. First, we describe general trends in the labour market regarding educational attainment and employment. Second, we document the main stylized facts on the evolution of individual hourly wages, hours of work and annual earnings. Lastly, the analysis focus on the distribution of household income and the redistributive role of the welfare system. Over this period, there has been a noteworthy increase in the general level of education of the population and in female labour force participation from very low levels. In addition, substantial changes have occurred in the size and composition of households, with reductions in marriage and cohabiting, in particular for lower educated groups. Fluctuations in inequality, how- ever, primarily moved with the business cycle. After a period of decreasing inequality during the mid-1990s expansion, the 2008 crisis came with sharp rises both in earnings and income inequality that peaked around 2014. After that, both unemployment and inequality decreased, except for the transitory surge during the COVID19 pandemic. Current inequality indicators are close to pre-2008 levels.


JEL Classification: D31, I24, J21, J31


Keywords: inequality, education, employment, earnings, income



     *This document has been prepared by the Spanish team of the Deaton Review Project, whose members are located at the Banco de Espan a. The authors thank the members of the other teams for very valuable comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Banco de Espan a or the Eurosystem.

1 Introduction

   The Spanish economy has undergone significant transformations throughout the past century, from a devastating civil war and post-war period to joining the European Union in the 1980s. Since then, notable advancements were observed in educational attainment and in female employment, both coming from very low levels. Other significant demographic dynamics occurred during this period, such as an ageing population and a reduction in the number of marriages and children. At the same time, the trajectory of the Spanish economy has been marked by three significant recessions: 1991, 2008, and 2020. In between these downturns, there have been periods characterized by long expansions. From the mid-1990s up until the onset of the Great Recession, Spain experienced a noteworthy average annual growth rate of 2.5% in GDP per capita at constant prices, surpassing the European average. Nonetheless, these seemingly favourable figures concealed an imbalanced growth that fuelled the real estate bubble. Subsequent to the collapse of the bubble and the international financial crisis in 2008, and the following debt crisis in 2010, the Spanish economy suffered a steep decline until 2013. From 2014, a gradual recovery emerged. Lastly, the downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic was of relatively short duration. Even though, Spain has been among the last advanced economies to regain its pre-2020 economic levels (OECD, 2023). Indeed, structural problems such as one of the highest unemployment rates in Europe, the presence of a dual labour market and a rigid wage determination system have contributed to a volatile labour market during the first two decades of the 21st century (Arellano et al., 2022).
   This paper adopts a descriptive but comprehensive approach to analyse the evolution of inequality in individual earnings and household income in Spain during these last two decades up until 2021. It builds upon the Deaton Country Studies Initiative, a collaborative effort involving 17 advanced economies, which focuses on data and measurement harmonization to gain insights into the drivers of economic inequalities across high-income countries.

   Income inequality in Spain is among the highest within developed countries. On the contrary, Spain presents a moderate degree of wealth inequality associated with a relatively more widespread home ownership than in other countries (Anghel et al., 2018). Although the level is comparatively low, it has increased since 2011, due to the reduction in the percentage of households that own their main home, especially among the youngest (Banco de Espan a, 2023). Another Spanish specificity is that both earnings and income inequality are strongly countercyclical, boosted by the abrupt fluctuations in employment (Bonhomme and Hospido, 2017). Earnings inequality was increasing since the mid-2000s and peaked at the end of the Great Recession. After 2014 inequality declined due to the recovery of the economic activity and employment, except for the COVID-19 surge. The Gini stood at 0.41 in 2021, having reached 0.44 in 2014. The 90:10 and 50:10 ratios were respectively above 10.5 and 4 in 2021, having reached 17 and 7 at their peak. The Gini of disposable household income was decreasing until 2007, then increasing until peaking in 2013 at 0.35, to decrease again afterwards. In 2014, the 90:10 ratio nearly reached 6.9, falling to 5 in 2021.
   Regarding the role of the Spanish welfare system in the evolution of these inequality measures, we find that at the worst moment of the Great Recession, in 2014, the bottom quartile received 85% of its income via social benefits, whereas the top quartile received 25%. After the Great Recession the fraction of household income coming from welfare benefits suffered a large reduction, except for the period around the pandemic. Once both benefits and taxes are considered, household disposable income is around 85% of gross income. In 2021, the poorest quartile had a disposable income amounting to 89.5% of gross income, while for the richest quartile, this figure was 75.9%.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly summarises the Spanish institutional context and the most recent related literature. Section 3 presents the data sources used in the analysis. Section 4 contains the main results for education and employment, Section 5 for individual earnings inequality, and Section 6 for household income. Finally, Section 7 concludes.

2 Institutional context

   Anghel et al. (2023) provide a detailed description of the institutional background in Spain. Here we just briefly mention labour market institutions that relate with wage and earnings inequality, and features of the welfare system that impact income inequality.
   Collective agreements set wage floors for firms in a particular sector.1 Around 80% of Spanish workers are covered by these agreements. Collective agreements restrict the ability of firms to vary wages in times of economic downturn, deriving the adjustment of wages to employment (Estrada et al., 2009; Izquierdo et al., 2003). At the same time, by setting a common floor, collective bargaining may reduce wage inequality (Ramos et al., 2022).
   Another important institution for wage setting is the minimum wage. It increased abruptly from 735  per month in 2018 to 1050  in 2022, after years of stagnation in real terms. Approximately, 10% of the Spanish workforce has been benefited by this increase, although it also induced job losses for the groups directly impacted (Barcel o et al., 2021).2 The implications of changes in the minimum wage for earnings inequality are somehow unclear: on the one hand, the wage distribution is compressed by the wage increase in the lower part; on the other, the composition of those still employed change due to the already mentioned employment losses at the bottom. Autor et al., 2018 found that, for the US case, increases in the minimum wage reduce inequality in the lower part of the distribution, but less than in previous literature. In the case of Spain, Bonhomme and Hospido, 2017 show that the timing of decreases and increases in the real minimum wage is unable to explain the patterns of total and lower tail inequality documented until 2010.
   With respect to unemployment benefits, the current replacement rate during the 180 first days of unemployment is 70% of the social security contributions accumulated while working.
1The sectoral agreements can be at the local, provincial, regional or national level, most of them being at
the provincial level, the most inefficient one (Izquierdo et al., 2003). Collective agreements can be negotiated also at the firm level. Since the 2012 labour reform, the signing of collective agreements at the company level has increased, but they are still very limited (Cruz Villal on, 2013).
      2Barcel o et al. (2021) estimate that for each percentage point increase in the minimum wage there is a loss of between 0.3 and 0.5 percentage point in employment for the group of workers directly affected by the increase.

After that, it goes down to 60%. Total duration can be extended up to a maximum of 2 years. After that, an assistance subsidy of 480  per month substitutes the unemployment benefit when exhausted. The system contemplates increases in the benefit if the unemployed person has dependent children.
   Severance payments are currently at 20 days of salary per year worked. For temporary contracts, the compensation lies between 8 and 12 days of salary per year worked. This gap by type of contract lowers the cost of temporary contracts, which have been particularly prevalent in Spain relative to other countries in Europe up until the labour reform of 2021 (Rodr iguez-Rodr iguez and Izquierdo, 2022). This high protection for permanent workers, but not for temporary ones, encourages firm to make adjustments through employment (mostly destroying temporary contracts), not through reductions in wages or working hours. A dual labour market like this one would deliver higher earnings inequality due to the wage gap by type of contract, but -most importantly - due to more work turnover (less days worked).3
   During the COVID-19 pandemic, one of the most notable economic policy measures was the implementation of furlough schemes by firms (ERTEs by their Spanish name) together with the suspension of activity in the case of the self-employed. Such measures were still in force in 2021 and they helped significantly to mitigate the increase in unemployment (Banco de Espan a, 2022).
   Aside from labour market institutions, the Spanish welfare system that provides public healthcare, education, and social benefits covering parenthood, sickness, permanent disability, retirement, and survival (such as orphan and widowhood), also impact income inequality.
   According to Eurostat data, expenditures in social protection in Spain has been below the European average both at the aggregate level and for items such as sickness/healthcare, disability, old age, family/children and housing. On the contrary, unemployment benefits and survivor pensions has been greater than in Europe. In terms of its redistributive capacity,
3Garc ia-Louzao et al. (2023) show that young workers with fixed-term contracts have 16 percentage point
less wage growth after 15 years compared to peers that had open-ended contracts. Garc ia-P erez et al. (2019) find that the large liberalisation in the regulation of fixed-term contracts in 1984 reduced the number of days worked (by 4.9%) and earnings (by 9.8%) over the first 10 years in the labour market.

the Spanish welfare system was redistributing less than its European counterparts (Cant o, 2013).4 More recently, social care policies, active employment policies and minimum income schemes have gained weight (Balbona and Guill en, 2021). In 2020 Spain introduced a national minimum income scheme, so-called the Ingreso M inimo Vital (IMV). Prior to the IMV introduction, the minimum income system in Spain was made up of 19 different regional schemes assessed as having limited poverty alleviation capacity because of limited generosity, restrictive eligibility criteria and low take-up (Arriba and Moreno, 2005; AIReF, 2023). The IMV is a household-level measure available to Spanish residents above 23 years old with low income and wealth. Bilbao-Goyoaga (2023) shows that during the initial year and a half of implementation, the policy had no statistically significant effect on households' material conditions (poverty rate and mean income). However, after two and a half years, it did considerably improve how households perceive the evolution of their finances.5 Also during COVID-19, Spain was one of the countries that expanded more its welfare system expenditure, contributing greatly to the reduction in inequality after the initial shock (Mart inez-L opez and Ruiz-Huerta, 2022).
   Within the social benefits, the reduced presence of social housing is notable. In contrast to neighbouring countries, social housing is mainly for purchase, not for rent. This is in line with the Spanish tendency to own houses rather than rent them, resulting in one of the highest home ownership rates in Europe. There are other housing benefits, aimed at covering part of the rent for families in social exclusion, but these types of measures vary a lot between regions and municipalities.
4Much of the reduction in inequality from gross to net incomes is thanks to the pension and transfers
system (around 80%) and only the remaining 20% due the tax system (Molin e, 2016). Other pending aspects are the regressivity of tax credits, which tend to benefit high incomes, and the low top tax rates in some Autonomous Communities (Garc ia-Miralles et al., 2019).
     5Still, there are high expectations regarding the recent implementation of the Minimum Living Income, which could reach up to 52% of households living in poverty. However, so far it has only reached 40% of potential beneficiaries, with a non-take up of 57% (AIReF, 2022, Banco de Espan a, 2023).

3 Data sources

   This paper combines several surveys, namely: the Labour Force Survey (EPA, by its Spanish acronym), the Wage Structure Survey (EES), the Life Conditions Survey (ECV) and the Survey of Household Finances (EFF).
   The Spanish Labour Force Survey is the main source for obtaining employment and education statistics. It is available every year since 1976 up until 2023. However, it does not contain information neither on hourly wages nor on earnings. Given this limitation, subsections 5.1 and 5.2 use data from the EES, while subsection 5.3 and section 6 use data from the ECV and the EFF.
   The EES is available in years 1995, 2002, 2006, 2010, 2014, and 2018, and contains detailed information on hourly wages for employees in firms with at least 10 workers and in a given point of the year. In addition, to ensure comparability across survey years, some sectors not included in the first waves are excluded from our analysis throughout the period.6 To scale up the information to annual wages, however, the EES survey assumes that individuals work the full year. This assumption tends to overestimate earnings for individuals at the bottom of the distribution and, consequently, underestimate inequality. This is the main reason why for annual earnings, we focus instead on the figures obtained from the ECV survey.
   The ECV is available annually from 2004 to 2023.7 It contains information at both individual and household levels. Our period of analysis covers since 2004 for household income and from 2006 onwards for individual annual earnings. The reference year for individual earnings and household income is the year prior to the survey. Contrary to the EES, the ECV contains both employed and self-employed workers, does not exclude any sector or type of firm and reflects total annual labour income without any adjustment to reflect full-time equivalent.
6These sectors are: Agriculture, hunting and forestry, Fishing, Public administration, social security,
and defence; Domestic service and home production, Extra-territorial organizations and bodies, Education, Health and Social Work, Other community, social and personal service activities.
     7The European version of the ECV (EU-SILC) provides comparative statistics on the distribution of income and on social exclusion in Europe.

   Finally, the Survey of Household Finances (EFF) is an official survey conducted by the Banco de Espan a since 2002 with the aim of obtaining direct information on the investment and financing conditions and decisions of Spanish households, as well as their wealth situation. It is available in years 2002, 2005, 2008, 2011, 2014, 2017 and 2020. As with the ECV, the EFF reference year for annual earnings and income is the year prior to the survey.
4 Employment and education

   The Spanish labour market is characterized by two salient features relative to other advanced economies: the structurally high level of unemployment and its marked cyclicality (Dolado et al., 2021). Unemployment has been on average 14% over the 1977-2023 period, reaching peaks as high as 20% in 1994 or 24% in 2013 (Figure 1). Also, except for the 2001-2008 period, long-term unemployment represents half of the total unemployment. As a consequence of these pronounced fluctuations in employment, wage inequality in Spain is strongly countercyclical (Bonhomme and Hospido, 2017). There are other often-mentioned problems in the Spanish labour market that might also contribute to this cyclicality, such as high temporary rates, low wage flexibility, low productivity in large established firms and high entry barriers for young workers (Bentolila et al., 2021; Dolado et al., 2021).
   Although these structural features are present throughout the period, the Spanish labour market also witnessed relevant compositional changes, being the massive entry of women into the labour force and the increase in the educational level of workers the two most important. The employment rate for women increased dramatically over this period, from 28% in 1977 to 71% in 2023 (Figure 2). As a consequence of that, the gender gap in employment
diminished from 69% in 1977 to 13% in 2023.
   In 1977, 91% of the working population had only completed primary education or less whereas the remaining 9% was equally spread among those with secondary education (4.7%) and those with tertiary education (4.7%). By 2023, 34% of the population had at most

primary education, 36.3% secondary education, and 29.7% tertiary education (Figure 3).8 Although educational attainment has advanced more rapidly for women, females still
have systematically lower employment rates than males at every education level (Figure 4). The employment rate of tertiary-educated males was on average 86% versus 74% for females. The gender gap is larger among those with secondary education (85% versus 58%) and is the highest among those with at most primary education (76% vs 36%). Over time, gender gaps were generally decreasing until 2013, but since 2014 the trend has halted. Nowadays, the labour force participation of women with children is still low compared to men, due to the inability of social policies (such as paternity leave, tax incentives or family policies) to fully overcome traditional gender roles (Osuna, 2018; Hupkau and Ruiz-Valenzuela, 2022).
5 Wage and Earnings Inequality

   In this section we first examine the evolution of individual hourly wages and, second, of hours worked, subsequently consolidating these two dimensions into annual earnings.
5.1 Hourly wages

   The median real hourly wage in Spain barely changed from 10.1 euros in 1995 to 10.2 euros in 2018.9 Over the period, males had a median hourly wage of 11.1 euros versus 8.7 euros for females. This gender gap went from having that women's median hourly wage represented 78% of men's in 1995 to 83% in 2018.10
   By level of education, we see that - between 1995 and 2018 - median real hourly wage diminished for males with tertiary education, increased for those with primary education and remained quite stable for those with secondary education. For females, on the contrary, median real hourly wages increased except for those with secondary education (Figure 5).
Both for men and women, the college premium (that is, the ratio of the median hourly

     8Despite this positive evolution, the Spanish education system continues to have problems such as the high dropout rates during secondary education, especially among men (Felgueroso et al., 2014).
9All monetary quantities in this document are expressed in euros of 2021.
    10Interestingly, gender differences in hourly wages increase along the working life: gender wage gaps at age 25 are smaller at every education groups that the gap at later ages.

wages of the most highly educated relative to the least) diminished over the period, but particularly so from 1995 to 2006.
   Figure 6 depicts the evolution of the Gini coefficient in hourly wages from 1995 to 2018. It went down from 0.26 in 1995 to 0.24 in 2006, and then increased to 0.26 again in 2018. The same pattern is observed both for males and females. Two factors explain this evolution. During the expansion, employment increased substantially while, at the same time, Spain experimented a decrease in the college premium among those working (Pijoan-Mas and S anchez-Marcos, 2010). During the great recession, the required adjustments were done in terms of reducing the amount of people working and less so in terms of the wages of those that remained employed (Bonhomme and Hospido, 2017).
   We get similar qualitative results when using percentile ratios instead of the Gini index (Figure 7). In 1995, individuals in the 90th percentile earned 3.7 times more than those of the 10th percentile. The ratio went down to 3.1 in 2010 and increased to 3.2 in 2018. The 50:10 ratio also decreased, but more modestly (from 1.7 in 1995 to 1.5 in 2010 and to 1.6 in 2018).
5.2 Hours of work

In Spain, there has been a decline in hours worked per week from 39.4 hours in 1995 to
36.8 in 2014. Working hours recovered slightly in 2018 (up until 37.1 hours).
   Figure 8 shows that all males, regardless of their educational attainment, work on average a similar number of hours per week (39 hours). Only those males with at most primary education significantly reduce their working hours from 40.1 in 1995 to 38.4 in 2018. For females, on the contrary, differences in working hours are substantial across education groups as well as the reductions over time. On average, females with at most primary education worked 33.6 hours per week, 36.5 those with secondary education, and 37.9 those with tertiary education. From 1995 to 2018, working time among employed women has decreased in 5 hours for primary-educated, in 2.5 hours for secondary-educated, and in 0.6 hours for tertiary-educated.

   Importantly, females with low hourly wages saw the biggest reduction in hours worked. These two facts combined reinforce the positive correlation between education and earnings. Additionally, given the increase in employment for females along these years, it seems that the new working women entered with shorter working hours.
5.3 Annual earnings

   As a result of stagnated hourly wages, decreased working hours and less stable working histories, median real annual earnings have also declined over the period. Median annual earnings were 18.1 thousand euros in 2005, decreased to 15.8 in 2014, and increased again up to 17.6 in 2022, although without recovering the levels before the Great Recession.
   By gender the evolution has shown only some mild convergence. Women's median earnings represented 70% of men's median earnings in 2005, and by 2022 the gap was 80%.11 Disaggregating by education, we uncover some noticeable differences (Figure 9). In terms of annual earnings, the college premium for men increased from 2005 to 2022. In 2005 the highest-educated men earn 1.5 times more than the least-educated men, while in 2022 the highest-educated men (women) earn 1.9 times more than the least-educated men. For women, on the contrary, the highest-educated earn relative to the least-educated the same amount (2.1 times more) both in 2005 and 2022.
Figure 10 depicts the evolution of the Gini coefficient of annual earnings in Spain, from
0.35 in 2005 to 0.41 in 2022. Two sub-periods stand out in the graph: until 2014 inequality increased almost continuously, while we see a reduction after that, with the exception of the COVID-19 episode in 2020 that implied a temporary surge in this measure. Importantly, contrary to what happens with hourly wages, inequality in annual earnings is higher for females than males. This comes from the previous observation that men have very similar working hours, whereas women have bigger disparities in working hours and employment depending on their level of education.
11This slow convergence has also been noticed by Osuna (2018). In general, despite being more educated
than men, females still earn much less (Guner et al., 2014).

   Figure 11 shows the evolution of the percentile ratios, documenting similar patterns as with the Gini. Between 2005 and 2014, the 90:10 ratio almost tripled (from 6 to 17) and then went down again (to 9 in 2022), while the 50:10 ratio more than doubled (from 2.8 to 6.6) to went down to 3.7 in 2022.12
6 Inequality in Household Income

   This section starts by looking at household composition. Next, we analyze the evolution of household incomes and, finally, the distributional impacts of the Spanish welfare system.13
6.1 Household composition

   The first salient fact about the composition of Spanish households is the reduction of marriages, from around 80% of the population to less than 60% in 50 years. Part of this decline has been compensated by an increase in cohabitation since the turn of the century. If we take cohabitation and marriages together, the number of couples living together has decayed more significantly for the least educated group (from 84% in 1977 to 68% in 2023) than for the tertiary-educated group (74% and 65%, respectively).
   The second fact is that, as women's labour force participation has increased, the likelihood of having dual earners couples versus single earner is also higher now.
   As a result of these shifts, three main changes occurred on the typology of Spanish households (Figure 12): first, a significant decrease in the share of couples with children (from
    12If we instead consider the numbers obtained using the EES we would have a Gini and values for the percentile ratios substantially below those obtained with the ECV. These differences in levels emphasize the importance of accounting for unstable working histories when explaining the evolution of wage and earnings inequality in Spain. The cyclicality and temporality of the Spanish labour market, accounted by in the ECV but not considered in the EES, shift inequality upwards. In any case, even if the database we choose alters the level of inequality, the overall evolution does not differ much. Also, results obtained using administrative records from the Social Security display a similar evolution (Arellano et al., 2022).
    13Household income measures are all expressed in euros of 2020, refer to one year before the reference year of the sample, and have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale so as figures are an approximation to the annual income available per adult household member. Hence, when we comment on characteristics of households (i.e. level of education) we refer to those of each adult member. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted.

42% in 1988 to 30% in 2023);14 second, a substantial increase in the share of single households without children (from 3.7% in 2000 to 13.4% in 2023); and, third, a sizeable number of households (over 20%) composed of parents and adult children. For this latter group, there exists a noticeable gradient by education of the parents with important consequences for inequality: when parents have lower education, this category represents 34% of the total number of households, while when parents have tertiary education, this category represents 16%.
6.2 Household income

   Median real gross household income has not changed substantially since 2005. At that time, it was 18 thousand euros, the same level as in the worst moment of the Great Recession. By 2022, median real gross household income was 20.4 thousand euros. The evolution of median disposable income is similar: from 15 thousand euros in 2005, and 2014, to 17 thousand euros in 2022. Working households have twice as much disposable income as non-working households. This ratio illustrates the importance of having a job in Spain.
   Figure 13 documents large differences by educational level. Households with tertiary education have almost twice as much disposable income as those with primary education (21 thousand euros vs 12 thousand euros in 2022).
   As Figures 14 and 15 show, also income inequality is highly countercyclical in Spain. From the turn of the century, we can differentiate three periods for which inequality move in parallel to unemployment. Firstly, a decrease in inequality until 2007. Secondly, an increase until 2013. Finally, there has been a progressive decline in inequality since 2014, altered only by the COVID-19 pandemic.15
14During the 2000s, this decrease was partially compensated by the influx of immigrants who had higher
fertility. Nevertheless, this effect was short lived.
    15The results presented in this subsection 6.2 come from the Spanish Life Conditions Survey (ECV). The same figures are included in the template using instead the Spanish Survey of Household Finances (EFF). The countercyclical evolution for inequality is less clear using the EFF. This discrepancy deserves more in-depth analysis. The great advantage about using the EFF is that, in addition to income, it also provides detailed information on wealth and consumption. According to the results in Anghel et al. (2018), which are currently in the process of being updated, wealth inequality is much higher than income inequality. However, by international standards, Spain has a moderate level of wealth inequality, which is associated with more

   Figure 14 shows that the Gini coefficient in disposable household income peaked in 2013 at 0.34, and that 23.3% of households had an income below 60% of the median. The income share belonging to the top 1% peaked earlier in 2010, rising to 4.8%. As with earnings inequality, we observe a reduction in household inequality since 2013. In 2022 the Gini coefficient was 0.31, close to the pre-crisis levels in 2007 and 2008.
   The 90:10 percentile ratio depicted in Figure 15 shows that from the starting value on 5.7 in 2003, the highest level of inequality was 5.8, reached in 2014. Comparing the evolution of the 90:50 and 50:10 ratios, we see that it is the latter that has increased the most. This tells us that inequality at the bottom of the distribution is behind the increase in overall inequality between 2007 and 2014. It is important to note that the pension system, the increase in top marginal rates between 2012 and 2014 and the increase in household size limited the expansion of inequality during the worst moment of the crisis (Anghel et al., 2018). After 2014, the percentile ratios decreased except for the 2020 episode. In 2022, the 90:10 percentile is at the same level as in 2007 (4.3).
6.3 Welfare system

Figure 16 aims to illustrate the redistributive role of the welfare system.
   First, Panel A plots how much of the gross household income comes from the welfare state's benefits. Both in 2014 and 2020, the bottom quartile of the income distribution received 35% of it via benefits, whereas the top quartile received 10%.16 Except for those peaks, values stand at around 28% for the bottom quartile and 9% for the top.
Second, Panel B shows the fraction of gross income, households paid in direct taxes17.

widespread ownership of real assets. The net wealth Gini index has risen to over 60% after 2011. Since 2011, the share of households that own their main home felt by 10pp, being the decline of 33pp for younger households and of 20pp for those in the bottom quartile of the wealth distribution. On the other hand, the variations in per capita consumption qualitatively followed the developments in per capita income. Even though, both the level of the inequality indicators and the size of the fluctuations are smaller than for income inequality.
    16Of all the countries in the Deaton Review, only Italy's and Greece's bottom quartiles reach such a high dependency from the state.
    17The direct taxes considered here are the personal income tax and the wealth tax, also including employee social security contributions.

Over the sample period, the bottom quartile paid 9% of direct taxes and the top 22%. The level of progressivity for these taxes was the highest in 2016, when the share for the top quartile was 4 times higher than the one for the bottom quartile; while in 2022 is around 3, similar to the pre-crisis level in 2007 or 2008.
   Third, once both benefits and taxes are considered (Panel C), household disposable income is around 85% of gross income. In 2022, the variation across quartiles was substantial: the poorest quartile has a disposable income that represents 87% of their gross income, while for the richest quartile the corresponding figure is 75%. The range of that variation has remained above 10 pp since 2008.
7 Conclusions

   During the last two decades in Spain, fluctuations in earnings and income inequality moved with the business cycle. First, we observed decreasing inequality during the mid-1990s expansion. The 2008 crisis came with sharp rises both in earnings and income inequality that peaked around 2014. After that, inequality decreased except for the transitory surge during the COVID19 pandemic. In 2022, inequality levels are close to those pre-2008.
   Importantly, there exists one demographic group that have suffered increasingly harsher conditions after the 2008 crisis: immigrant households (Sanz-de Galdeano and Terskaya, 2020). Prior to 2005, the small immigrant population in Spain was similarly skilled as natives and also have similar employment outcomes. Even though, they had lower individual earnings and household income. After 2005, the group of immigrants become larger (from 1.5% in 2000 to 10% in 2015 and 15% in 2022) but less educated than natives, further worsening their labour market outcomes (except for hours of work). As a result of this, by 2020 migrants accounted for almost 40% of the poorest income decile, while their representation is only 6% in the richest decile. This group represents an interesting avenue for future research.

                                  References AIReF (2022). Primera opinio n ingreso m inimo vital. AIReF (2023). Segunda opini on ingreso m inimo vital.
Anghel, B., H. S. Basso, O. Bover, J. M. Casado, L. Hospido, M. Izquierdo, I. A. Kataryniuk,
A. Lacuesta, and E. Montero, J. M. Vozmediano-Peraita (2018). Income, consumption and wealth inequality in spain. SERIEs 9 (4), 351-387.
Anghel, B., O. Bover, L. Hospido, J. Ortega, and A. V. Regil (2023). Income, consumption and wealth inequality in spain. Deaton Review Country Studies (Spain).
Arellano, M., S. Bonhomme, M. De Vera, L. Hospido, and S. Wei (2022). Income risk inequality: evidence from spanish administrative records. Quantitative Economics 13 (4), 1747-1801.
Arriba, A. and L. Moreno (2005). Spain: Poverty, social exclusion and safety nets. In T. S. Hawley and R. G. Hawley (Eds.), Welfare State Reform in Southern Europe: Fighting Poverty and Social Exclusion in Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece, pp. 110-162. London: Routledge.
Autor, D. H., A. Manning, and C. L. Smith (2018). Income, consumption and wealth inequality in spain. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8 (1), 58-99.
Balbona, D. L. and A. M. Guill en (2021). The recalibration of public social spending in spain: Towards a social investment state? Revista Espan ola de Investigaciones Sociolo gicas (REIS) 175 (175), 85-122.
Banco de Espan a (2022). Annual report 2021. Banco de Espan a (2023). Annual report 2022.
Barcel o, C., M. Izquierdo, A. Lacuesta, S. Puente, A. V. Regil, and E. Villanueva (2021). Los efectos del salario m inimo interprofesional en el empleo: Nueva evidencia para espan a. Banco de Espan a Occasional Paper (2113).
Bentolila, S., F. Felgueroso, M. Jansen, and J. F. Jimeno (2021). Lost in recessions: youth employment and earnings in spain. SERIEs 13, 11-49.
Bilbao-Goyoaga, E. (2023). Perceptions matter: Quasi-experimental evidence on the effects of spain's new minimum income on households' financial wellbeing. LSE Working Paper .

Bonhomme, S. and L. Hospido (2017). The cycle of earnings inequality: evidence from spanish social security data. Economic Journal 127 (603), 1244-1278.
Canto , O. (2013). La capacidad redistributiva del sistema espan ol de prestaciones e impuestos.
Papeles de econom ia espan ola 135, 140-152.

Cruz Villal on, J. (2013). Impacto de las reformas laborales sobre la negociaci on colectiva.
Revista Andaluza de Trabajo y Bienestar Social 120, 13-32.

Dolado, J. J., F. Felgueroso, and J. F. Jimeno (2021). Past, present and future of the spanish labour market: when the pandemic meets the megatrends. Applied Economic Analysis 29 (85), 21-41.
Estrada, A., M. Izquierdo, and A. Lacuesta (2009). El funcionamiento del mercado de trabajo y el aumento del paro en espan a. Banco de Espan a Economic Bulletin, 1-20.
Felgueroso, F., M. Guti errez-Dom`enech, and S. Jim enez-Mart in (2014). Dropout trends and educational reforms: the role of the logse in spain. IZA Journal of Labor Policy 3, 1-24.
Garc ia-Louzao, J., L. Hospido, and A. Ruggieri (2023). Dual returns to experience. Labour Economics 80 (102290).
Garc ia-Miralles, E., N. Guner, and R. Ramos (2019). The spanish personal income tax: facts and parametric estimates. SERIEs 10, 439-477.
Garc ia-P erez, J. I., I. Marinescu, and J. Vall-Castello (2019). Can fixed-term contracts put low skilled youth on a better career path? evidence from spain. Economic Journal 129 (620), 1693-1730.
Guner, N., E. Kaya, and V. S anchez-Marcos (2014). Gender gaps in spain: policies and outcomes over the last three decades. SERIEs 5, 61-103.
Hupkau, C. and J. Ruiz-Valenzuela (2022). Work and children in spain: challenges and opportunities for equality between men and women. SERIEs 13, 243-268.
Izquierdo, M., E. Moral, and A. Urtasun (2003). El sistema de negociaci on colectiva en espan a: Un an alisis con datos individuales de convenios. Banco de Espan a Occasional Paper 302.
Mart inez-L opez, R. and J. Ruiz-Huerta (2022). V informe sobre la desigualdad en espan a 2022: el impacto de la pandemia. Fundaci on Alternativas.

Molin e, E. B. (2016). Gasto social, redistribuci on y desigualdad. Papeles de econom ia espan ola 147, 128-144.
OECD (2023). Oecd economic outlook.

Osuna, V. (2018). What accounts for the increase in female labor force participation in spain.
Economics 12 (1), 20180016.

Pijoan-Mas, J. and V. Sa nchez-Marcos (2010). Spain is different: Falling trends of inequality.
Review of Economic Dynamics 13 (1), 154-178.

Ramos, R., E. Sanroma , and H. Simo n (2022). Collective bargaining levels, employment and wage inequality in spain. Journal of Policy Modeling 44 (2), 375-395.
Rodr iguez-Rodr iguez, F. J. and M. Izquierdo (2022). La evoluci on del empleo y del paro en el tercer trimestre de 2022, segu n la encuesta de poblaci on activa. Banco de Espan a Economic Bulletin 4.
Sanz-de Galdeano, A. and A. Terskaya (2020). The labor market in spain, 2002-2018. IZA World of Labor .

Figure 1: Unemployment rate by duration of unemployment over time

Source: Spanish labour force survey (INE) 1977-2023.

Notes: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Unemployment rate is calculated as the fraction of labour force aged 25-60, split between short-term (less than 1 year) and long-term (1 year or more) duration of unemployment.

Figure 2: Employment rates by sex, over time



Source: Spanish labour force survey (INE) 1977-2023.

Notes: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 who have completed full-time education.





Figure 3: Educational attainment over time

Source: Spanish labour force survey (INE) 1977-2023.

Notes: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 who have completed full-time education.

Figure 4: Gender gaps in employment rates by education, over time

Source: Spanish labour force survey (INE) 1977-2023.

Notes: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 who have completed full-time education.




Figure 5: Median real hourly wage among employees by sex and education, over time


Source: Structure of Earnings Survey (INE) 1995, 2002, 2006, 2010, 2014, 2018.

Notes: Sample is employees aged 25-60. Wages are in 2021 prices.

Figure 6: Gini coefficient of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time

Source: Structure of Earnings Survey (INE) 1995, 2002, 2006, 2010, 2014, 2018.

Notes: Sample is employees aged 25-60.





Figure 7: 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time

Source: Structure of Earnings Survey (INE) 1995, 2002, 2006, 2010, 2014, 2018.

Notes: Sample is employees aged 25-60.

Figure 8: Mean hours worked among employees, by sex and education, over time

Source: Structure of Earnings Survey (INE) 1995, 2002, 2006, 2010, 2014, 2018.

Notes: Sample is employees aged 25-60. Hours include paid (but not unpaid) overtime and have been top-coded to 97 hours per week.




Figure 9: Median real gross individual earnings, by sex and education, over time

Source: Spanish Life Conditions Survey (INE) 2006-2023.

Notes: Sample is employees and self-employed aged 25-60. Individual earnings are in 2021 prices.

Figure 10: Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time


Source: Spanish Life Conditions Survey (INE) 2006-2023.

Notes: Sample is employees and self-employed aged 25-60.


Figure 11: 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of gross individual earnings by sex, over time


Source: Spanish Life Conditions Survey (INE) 2006-2023.

Notes: Sample is employees and self-employed aged 25-60.












Figure 12: Share of individuals by position in the household, over time


Source: Spanish labour force survey (INE) 1988-2023.

Notes: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 who have completed full-time education.









Figure 13: Median real disposable household income for working households, overall and by education, over time

Source: Spanish Life Conditions Survey (INE) 2006-2023.

Notes: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 in working households. Disposable income is gross household income, plus benefits less taxes and social security contributions, adjusted using the OECD equivalence scale. Income is in 2021 prices.









Figure 14: Gini, relative poverty, and top 1% share of disposable household income for all households, over time



Source: Spanish Life Conditions Survey (INE) 2004-2023.

Notes: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with negative than 60% of contemporaneous median income before the deduction of housing costs.










Figure 15: 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of disposable household income for all households, over time




Source: Spanish Life Conditions Survey (INE) 2004-2023.

Notes: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.

Figure 16: Welfare state effect on incomes, by quartiles Panel A: Benefits / (Gross Income + Employee SSCs)












Panel B: Direct taxes / (Gross Income + Employee SSCs)


Panel C: Disposable Income / (Gross Income + Employee SSCs)

Source: Spanish Life Conditions Survey (INE) 2006-2023.

Notes: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Individuals with zero or negative earnings are excluded. Benefits include unemployment, old-age, survivor, sickness and disability benefits, education, family, children and housing allowances, and other social exclusion benefits not elsewhere classified.








lnstitute for Fiscal Studies

Country Studies: Inequalities in Europe and North America
A parallel study to the IFS Deaton Review

Arizo Karimi Charlotte Lucke Marten Palme














Inequality in Sweden 1985-2021







Inequality in Sweden: 1985-2021
Arizo Karimi, Charlotte Lucke and Mårten Palme
Uppsala University and Stockholm University


Contents
Inequality in Sweden: 1985-2021	1
1. Executive summary	2
2. Institutional background	3
3. Notes on measurement and definitions	6
4. Individual employment and earnings	8
4.1 Trends in employment	8
4.2 Trends in wages (employees only)	12
4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)	16
4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self-
employed)	18
4.5 Self-employment	23
5. Labour market institutions	26
5.1 Minimum wage and unions	26
5.2 The effects of taxes and state benefits across the income distribution	28
6. Household incomes	31
6.1 Trends in household composition	31
6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households	36
6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households	39
7. Immigrant outcomes	43
8. References	46
9. Data appendix	47
10. Appendix charts	48

1. Executive summary
In an international comparison, Sweden exhibits low wage and earnings inequality: the Gini for male wages has been below 0.26 and the Gini for male income below 0.32 since 1985. However, inequality in household disposable income has continuously increased during the last 30 years, despite constant working hours inequality.
The first part of this development has its roots in a deep recession, which Sweden experienced in the early 1990s. It occurred during a time of increasing wage and earnings inequality, particularly among male workers. The crisis had a strong and persistent effect on employment, with large decreases in employment for young workers aged 16-24. Earnings inequality spiked during the crisis for males and remained constant afterwards, while it temporarily increased for females. Wage inequality spiked for both genders and continued to rise until the 2000s.
The period after the recession is characterised by steady earnings growth and constant or slightly decreasing levels of employment and of wage and earnings inequality. Since 1993, the employment rate has remained stable among the young and prime-aged, albeit at a lower level compared to the pre-crisis period, while it has increased for older workers (aged 61-64). Neither wage nor earnings inequality for males decreased enough to match its pre-crisis state. The development for females is somewhat different. Female wage inequality has continued to rise until today, though at a slower pace since the 2000s, and hours worked increased for women during the entire period due to higher labour force participation. Female earnings inequality has nearly decreased to its pre-crisis level. This development translates into a decreasing gender wage and earnings gap overall.
While the developments differ by gender, overall wage and earnings inequality has decreased since the end of the crisis. However, disposable household income inequality has simultaneously shown an opposing trend. Assortative matching has only slightly increased, and the share of single households has remained stable over time and cannot explain the trends in inequality. We find that capital incomes appear to drive a substantial part of the increased disposable income inequality since the early 2000s. There also seems to be a smaller reliance on social insurance at the bottom of the income distribution over time, as well as a declining generosity in the public benefits system such as a decreased replacement rate in unemployment insurance (Friedrich, Laun and Meghir, 2020).



2. Institutional background
The Swedish welfare state model encapsulates two core concepts: universal and large-scale transfers financed through taxation and social security contributions, with very little reliance on means-tested benefits; and wages and working conditions being set through centralised bargaining between trade unions and employers' confederations without direct involvement of government. Below, we give a brief overview of the main institutions that make up the welfare state in Sweden.


Provisions of the welfare state Unemployment insurance1
Sweden is one of few countries with a voluntary unemployment insurance (UI) scheme. The UI system in Sweden consists of two parts: the first part is mandatory, and provides basic coverage financed by a payroll tax. The benefits received under this basic coverage do not depend on the individual's earnings prior to job displacement, and the benefit level is low: in 2019, the basic UI benefit was 365 SEK per day (approx. 35 EUR or 39 USD)2, corresponding to 24% of the median full-time equivalent daily wage.
The second part of the UI system is voluntary: workers can opt for comprehensive coverage by paying an insurance premium to a UI fund. Upon job displacement, workers who have paid a premium for comprehensive coverage during the 12 months prior to displacement receive benefits that replace 80% of pre-displacement wage income, up to a cap, instead of the basic coverage, conditional on fulfilling a work requirement.
Even though the administration of the comprehensive coverage is administered by UI funds, UI in Sweden is publicly provided. The government determines benefit levels and insurance premiums, and the premiums cover only a small share of the benefits paid to unemployed individuals; the difference is subsidised by the government.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the benefit level in the basic coverage was raised to 510 SEK per day (around 49 EUR or 55 USD), to dampen the effects of job displacement on income and consumption. In the comprehensive coverage, the ceiling was raised for the first 100 days during an unemployment spell (from 910 to 1,200 SEK daily, corresponding to an increase from 60% to 80% of the median wage), and for the remainder of an unemployment spell from 760 to 1,000 SEK daily (from 50% to 66% of the median wage). Moreover, the membership conditions and the work requirement were eased (see, for example, Adermon et al., 2022, for an overview of the changes made to all aspects of the welfare system in Sweden during the COVID-19 pandemic.).
Sickness insurance
Sweden has a universal, compulsory, publicly administered sickness insurance (SI) scheme, financed by a proportional payroll tax, that replaces forgone earnings for workers whose work capacity is temporarily reduced due to health issues. The replacement rate is 80% of previous earnings, up to a cap. After a one- day waiting period, the employer compensates a sick worker for the first 14 days of a sickness spell with sick pay, after which the Social Insurance Agency pays sickness benefits. A doctor's certificate is required for sickness spells longer than 7 days.


1 See, for example, Landais et al. (2021) for a thorough description of the Swedish unemployment insurance scheme.
2 Exchange rate in December 2019: 1 SEK = 0.0952 EUR, and 1 SEK = 0.1068 USD. For a very rough approximation, divide all SEK values by 10 to get the EUR or USD value.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, the one-day waiting period in the SI scheme was reimbursed by the Social Insurance Agency, to encourage workers with symptoms to stay home from work. The requirement to supply a doctor's certificate for continued sick pay and sickness benefits was postponed from day 8 to day 21, and later abolished altogether. Moreover, the sick pay provided by employers was reimbursed by the government (for more details see Adermon et al., 2022).
Both unemployment benefits and sickness benefits are taxable income.


Other benefits3
Income support: Individuals who are unable to financially support themselves are eligible for means- tested basic income support in the form of social assistance from their municipality. Means-testing takes place at the household level, and includes depletion of any savings or other assets (owned property) for eligibility. Families with children and young adults may also be eligible for (means-tested) housing allowance from the Social Insurance Agency. (During the COVID-19 pandemic, the housing allowance was raised to prevent eviction of families.)
Child allowance: A universal benefit that is not means-tested is disbursed to all families with children eligible for social insurance. The child allowance amounts to about 100 EUR per child and month until the child reaches 18 years old (or finishes high school). Families with two or more kids also receive a supplementary multi-child allowance, the size of which varies with the number of kids. The allowance and supplementary allowance are paid out by the Social Insurance Agency. Social assistance, child allowance, and housing allowance transfers are not taxable.
Parental benefits: Parents are eligible for up to 480 days of paid parental leave per child, which can be used before the child turns 12. Out of the 480 days, 390 are compensated at a rate of 80% of previous earnings, up to a cap, and the remaining 90 days are replaced with a low flat rate. Parents who do not meet the work condition receive a daily flat rate for the full 480 days. For working parents of children younger than 12 years old, there is also a temporary leave benefit that compensates for earnings losses, up to a cap for a maximum of 60 days per year and child, when caring for a sick child. Parental benefits are taxable.
Before the pandemic, the temporary benefits for caring for a sick child required a doctor's certificate
from day 8, but this was postponed to day 22 during the pandemic.


Provision of public services
Healthcare
Healthcare in Sweden is mainly funded by direct income taxes raised by the three different levels of government: central, regional (county council), and local (municipality). The regional county councils are the main providers and funders of healthcare in Sweden, responsible for both primary and specialised in- and outpatient healthcare in their catchment areas. Each council sets its own patient fees, but the amount a patient pays out of pocket is capped at the national level. Patient fees make up only a small share (around 3%) of total healthcare spending. Thus, all Swedish citizens have strong financial protection from both direct costs for healthcare and indirect costs due to forgone income from temporary or permanent work capacity reduction.



3 See Adermon et al. (2022) for a more detailed overview of the benefits systems in Sweden.



Education
Local government (i.e., Swedish municipalities) is mandated to supply childcare to children with parents who either work or are full-time students. In addition to childcare, the municipalities are responsible for supplying primary and high school education. The education system is financed from locally collected tax revenues.
Swedish tertiary education is free of tuition fees and run by the government. All students are offered stipends and subsidised student loans.


Tax system
The Swedish tax system is a dual income tax system in which labour earnings and capital incomes are taxed separately. In addition, the income tax is individual-based (i.e., spouses are taxed separately).
All individuals aged 65 and younger face the same tax schedule, with some variation in the local tax rate across municipalities. A proportional local tax rate applies to the sum of all earned income (and taxable transfers). The average local income tax rate in 2019 was 32.19%. For total labour earnings exceeding a certain threshold, a central government income tax is due (levied on around 11% of the population in 2023). The central government income tax schedule consisted of two brackets until 2020: the marginal tax rates in each bracket were 20% (for incomes between 490,700 and 689,300 SEK annually) and 25% (for incomes above 689,300), respectively.
Since 2007, there has been an Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) in Sweden. The EITC is a function of earned income, and thus not granted for transfers such as UI or SI benefits. Moreover, the EITC in Sweden is general: all individuals aged 66 or younger face the same tax credit schedule regardless of marital status or the number of children in the household.


Wage setting
Sweden is heavily unionised: the vast majority of workers (91%) are covered by collective bargaining agreements, formed at the sector level, imposing lower bounds on workers' wages. Wage bargaining occurs at three levels. First, unions and employer organisations set the frame for wage formation through central agreements. Once negotiations at the central level are complete, bargaining at the local (establishment) level occurs, where the local union and firm representatives translate the central agreement to the establishment level. Finally, wages at the individual level are negotiated between the manager and the worker.

3. Notes on measurement and definitions
Time periods

? Our data cover the period 1985-2021 and 1990/91-2021 for family-related measures

? In charts showing selected periods, we have chosen the years 1985, 1993, 2001, 2009, and 2021.

Unit of analysis and sample

? Throughout, the unit of analysis is individuals.

? For most parts of the analysis, we restrict the sample to those aged 25-60 who have completed full-time education (except for Figures 1-2). Data for individuals older than 64 years are not consistently available, so even in figures without age restrictions, we use 64 as the maximum age.

Definitions:

? Employment rate: we define employment based on the individual's existence in the matched employer-employee register (all workers with an employment link, or self-employed, at any point during the calendar year). This does not account for short-term unemployment, which can lead to slightly higher employment levels overall. We cannot determine the active versus inactive population, instead we use all Swedish residents aged 16-64 as the baseline.

? Individual income:

o Gross annual real earnings (includes self-employed): Information on labour earnings is derived from the tax register. Earnings include overtime pay, vacation pay, the first 2-3 weeks of sick pay and severance payments. When an individual has multiple jobs, the earnings from all jobs are added. This measure includes business income. We convert nominal gross earnings into real terms (2019 prices, using the CPI).

o Gross annual real income: For selected figures we use a broader measure of gross income. This measure sums the above labour earnings, business income, capital income, benefits and pension income (if applicable). We convert nominal gross income into real terms (2019 prices, using the CPI).

o Disposable annual real individual income: Income after deducting taxes and adding benefits and tax credits. Starting in 1991, our raw variable includes capital income. We correct for that by subtracting net capital income from the raw variable. We convert disposable income into real terms (2019 prices, using the CPI).

? Household income: Household equivalised income is obtained by summing the earnings of each member of the household and dividing by a scaling factor. We use the OECD-modified scale, where the first adult receives a weight of 1, and each additional adult (age 14 or older) a weight of 0.5, and every child below the age of 14 a weight of 0.3. The weights are summed to form the scale factor.

? Hours of work: Our variable is contracted hours worked expressed as a percentage of a full- time employment. Overtime work is not included. We also have data on this for self-employed workers. There are 52 observations of zero hours worked (which we will drop from the analysis



when focusing on those in work); there are no negative hours. Between 1990 and 1994 there are quite a few large outliers, which is why we will exclude all values higher than 2.5 (250%) between those years. This variable comes from the wage structure statistics, which cover the entire public sector and approximately 50% of the private sector. We do not weight this due to the lack of adequate weights.

? Wages: Full-time equivalent monthly wages or approximate hourly wages, in 2019 prices (SEK). This variable comes from the wage structure statistics, which cover the entire public sector and approximately 50% of the private sector. We do not weight this due to the lack of adequate weights. Sometimes we convert this variable to hourly wages using an approximation where we multiply the wage by 12 (months) and divide it by 1985.54 (the mean number of hours worked per year). Zero, negative and missing wages are dropped if they exist.

? Benefits: We only measure unemployment and certain parental benefits separately; we do not have separate data on sickness-related benefits.

? Taxes: Taxes are measured as final taxes excluding deductible taxes.

Splits:

? Sex: female, male.

? Education: We follow the ISCED-2011 definition to construct three education groups. The first group contains categories 0-2 and is entitled 'no high school', the second corresponds to category 3, 4 and 5 ('high school') and the third corresponds to categories 6 and above ('university'). Due to changes in the reporting of education categories in Sweden in 2000, there is a tiny shift in levels in that year.

? Household types: Single without dependent children; single with dependent children; couples without dependent children; couples with dependent children; adult child; other. Parents of adult children go in the 'other' category. A dependent child is a child aged 0-15 or 16-19 and in full-time education, living with parents.

? Cohabiting couples: Cohabiting couples without joint children are not identified in the data. We thus consider individuals to be cohabiting if they are married, in a same-sex partnership, or in a cohabitation with joint children.

4. Individual employment and earnings
This section looks at trends in individual employment and earnings. We start by examining trends in employment and then continue with individual labour market outcomes. As earnings are a product of wages and hours worked, we will look at these separately, before analysing trends in earnings. Our analysis for wages and hours will focus on employees but include self-employed when it comes to earnings.

4.1 Trends in employment

Figure 1 shows that the crisis in the early 1990s in Sweden had a significant impact on employment, especially among young workers (16-24) and older workers (61-64). Prime-aged workers were only slightly affected. Since the crisis and its aftermath, the employment rate has increased again but without attaining its pre-crisis level. The trends and levels for men and women throughout are very similar except for the oldest age group (61-64) in the pre-crisis years. During Covid, young workers' employment rates dipped as the economy slowed down and employment opportunities became scarce.

Figure 1. Employment rates by age and sex, over time
Male, 16-24	Male, 25-60	Male, 61-64
Female, 16-24	Female, 25-60	Female, 61-64
100
90
80
70
60
50
40

Year
Note: We define employment based on the individual's existence in the matched employer-employee register (all workers with an employment link, or self-employed, at any point during the calendar year). This does not account for short-term unemployment, which can lead to slightly higher employment levels overall. We cannot determine the active versus inactive population, instead we use all Swedish residents aged 16-64 as the baseline.

Figure 2 shows again that the employment rate in the crisis year 1993 was relatively low for young and old people compared to the employment rate in 2001 for young workers and 2009-21 for older workers. Older workers may have faced longer-term consequences of the crisis, while young workers were more affected by the more recent crises such as the financial crisis and COVID. In general, the differences are small and even the rates for men and women are very similar in behaviour and magnitude.



Figure 2. Employment rates over life cycle by sex, selected years
Female


Male

100	100
90	90
80	80
70	70
60	60
50	50
40	40
30	30
20	20
10	10
0	0

Age	Age
--	1993	--	2001	--	2009	--	2021

Since 1985, there has been a considerable decrease in the number of people attaining a high school diploma, dropping from 40% to 15% in 2021. High school graduates have remained more or less constant around 50-60%, and the proportion of people with a university degree has risen by almost 20 percentage points since 1985 (Figure 3). The small shift in levels in 2000 is due to changes in reporting of educational groups.

Figure 3. Educational attainment over time

ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8
70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Year

Figure 4. Educational attainment by sex, over time
Male: ISCED 0-2	Male: ISCED 3-5	Male: ISCED 6-8
Female: ISCED 0-2	Female: ISCED 3-5	Female: ISCED 6-8
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Year

Figure 4 paints a very similar picture to Figure 3. The additional split by gender shows that women have a slightly higher proportion in all categories except ISCED 3-5 (high school), where men represent the larger percentage. The increase in university degrees is especially pronounced for women, rising from 10% to 37%, while the male percentage only increased from 10% to 25%.

Figure 5. Employment rates by education, over time
ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60

Year

Note: We define employment based on the individual's existence in the matched employer-employee register (all workers with an employment link, or self-employed, at any point during the calendar year). This does not account for short-term unemployment, which can lead to slightly higher employment levels overall.



Employment rates decreased slightly during the 1990s crisis, and most strongly for the lowest educational group, ISCED 0-2. Employment among high school dropouts has continually decreased ever since the crisis, dropping from 88% in 1985 to 71% in 2021 (Figure 5). This seems to be due to an increasing share of immigrants in the lower educational groups. The other educational groups (ISCED 3- 8) had a relatively small decrease and have since managed to remain more or less constant, albeit without regaining their pre-crisis level.

Figure 6 confirms this and shows that men tend to have a higher employment rate in all educational categories except among university graduates where there is almost no gender gap. The largest gender difference appears to be among high school dropouts, where the male employment rate in 2021 is more than 10 percentage points higher than the female employment rate.



Figure 6. Employment rates by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0-2	Male: ISCED 3-5	Male: ISCED 6-8
Female: ISCED 0-2	Female: ISCED 3-5	Female: ISCED 6-8
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60

Year

 Total	 Short-term	 Long-term
12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Year
Note: Data from the OECD, retrieved 19 May 2023. There were no data on long-term unemployment for 2005 and 2006.

The unemployment rate in Sweden was very low until the crisis hit. Ever since then, unemployment has varied between 5% and 10%. There was another increase in unemployment during the financial crisis in 2008 and in the COVID years 2020-21, but much smaller in magnitude than the increase during the 1990s crisis. This is to a great extent due to short-term unemployment. The long-term unemployment rate has decreased slightly since the 1990s with some variation due to the aforementioned crises (Figure 7).

4.2 Trends in wages (employees only)4

While the overall trend in wages is upward, rising by about 100 SEK/hour5 from 1985 to 2021, there was a small but clearly visible dip during the years of the crisis in the 1990s, before wages recovered again. The 2008 crisis is much smaller in magnitude than the crisis in the 1990s and hardly discernible. Female median wages remain almost 20 SEK/hour (very roughly around 2 EUR or 2 USD) lower than male median wages over the entire time period (Figure 8).













4 Data in this section comes from the full public sector and approximately 50% of the private sector. It is not weighted due to the lack of adequate weights.
5 80 SEK in 2019 corresponded to approximately 7.6 EUR or 8.5 USD.



Figure 8. Median hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time
Male	Female	All

210

190

170

150

130

110

90

Year

The gender wage gap seems to be increasing in education, with male university graduates earning much more than equally qualified women. While there was only a small difference in wages for female high school dropouts and high school graduates in 1985, wages for female high school graduates have increased slightly more over the years so that there is now a higher return to education on this level than 36 years ago (Figure 9).




Figure 9. Median real hourly wages among employees, by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0-2	Male: ISCED 3-5	Male: ISCED 6-8
Female: ISCED 0-2	Female: ISCED 3-5	Female: ISCED 6-8
270
250
230
210
190
170
150
130
110
90

Year

years

220


1985



220


1993

200	200
180	180
160	160
140	140
120	120
100	100
80	80

Age	Age



370

2009


370

2021


320	320

270	270

220	220

170	170

120	120

Age	Age


--- Female, ISCED 0-2
--- Female, ISCED 3-5
--- Female, ISCED 6-8
- - Male, ISCED 0-2
- - Male, ISCED 3-5
- - Male, ISCED 6-8
In Figure 10 we see that men are always better paid than women and this gap is larger the higher the educational level and increasing in age. The trend in median wages for the higher educated is generally increasing, while the lower educated keep a similar wage throughout the life cycle. The dip in hourly wages at the end of the life cycle for higher educated workers in 1993 and 2009 might be a result of the crises.

Figure 11 and Figure 12 show a rise in wage inequality with three measures, the Gini coefficient, the 90:10 ratio and the 50:10 ratio, overall and for males and females. In all measures, inequality among men is higher than among women and there is a rise in inequality in the aftermath of the crisis. The Gini coefficient and 90:10 ratio increased sharply until the early 2000s, whereafter the male trends remained mostly constant, while female trends increased again after the financial crisis. The 50:10 ratio for males increased less between 1990 and 2008, meaning that the increase in inequality is primarily due to changes in the top of the distribution. Only after the financial crisis does the 50:10 ratio for males start



to increase. The 50:10 ratio for women follows overall inequality more closely until 2008. Afterwards, it also increases sharply and even surpasses the 90:10 ratio.

Figure 11. Gini coefficient of monthly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time
All	Male	Female
0.20

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.08

Year

Note: The top and bottom 1% of the gender-specific wage distribution have been excluded.

Figure 12. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of monthly full-time equivalent wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time

All: 90:10 ratio	Male: 90:10 ratio	Female: 90:10 ratio
All: 50:10 ratio	Male: 50:10 ratio	Female: 50:10 ratio

2.3


2.2
2.1


1.4

2.0


1.9
1.8


1.3

1.7
1.6
1.5	1.2

Year

Figure 13. Annualised growth in monthly full-time equivalent wages among employees by wage percentile, overall and by sex, selected periods

6	6
5	5
4	4
3	3
2	2
1	1
0	0
Percentile	Percentile

6	6
5	5
4	4
3	3
2	2
1	1
0	0
Percentile	Percentile
----
Female
----
Male

Except for in the period 1993-2001, women tend to have a higher growth in wages than men (Figure 13). The period 1993-2001 is unique also because it exhibits a much higher general growth rate for wages, similarly for men and women. The lowest percentiles saw their wages rise by roughly 3% per year, while the top 5% earners even saw growth rates of 5%.

4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)6

Average hours worked (measured in our data as the percentage of full-time that an individual is contracted for) among employees dipped slightly during the crisis in the 1990s. While male hours worked regained their previous level and remained there, female hours worked steadily increased since after the crisis, from 80% in 1985 to more than 91% in 2021 (Figure 14).




6 Data in this section comes from the full public sector and approximately 50% of the private sector. It is not weighted due to the lack of adequate weights.



Figure 14. Mean hours (as % of full-time) worked among employees, overall and by sex, over time
Male	Female	All
100

95

90

85

80

75

Year



Figure 15. Mean hours (as % of full-time) worked among employees, by sex and education, over time
Male: ISCED 0-2	Male: ISCED 3-5	Male: ISCED 6-8
Female: ISCED 0-2	Female: ISCED 3-5	Female: ISCED 6-8
100

95

90

85

80

75

Year

The split by education in Figure 15 shows that, among males, all education groups work similar hours. However, there is a clear difference in the level of hours worked for women, with higher-educated women working more hours. This difference remains roughly the same all along the overall increase in hours worked for females.

Figure 16 illustrates that the growth in male working hours is very close to zero and often even negative, meaning men tend to work less than in previous years. The only exception is the period 1993-2001, which includes the crisis and its aftermath. The male growth rate is also relatively stable across wage

ventiles. The opposite holds for women: female working hours have tended to increase in past years. While the highest growth during most periods came from the lower end of the wage distribution, there are also local peaks at other points of the distribution. Between 1985 and 1993, female wage growth was the highest of all the periods, with peaks both in the lower ventiles and the very top. The period 1993-2001 is an outlier again, with the lower end of the wage distribution showing decreasing working hours and the peak being at around the top quartile.


Figure 16. Annualised growth in mean hours worked among employees by monthly wage ventile, overall and by sex, selected years


3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5












Ventile

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5












Ventile




3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5












Ventile

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5












Ventile


----
Female
----
Male


4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self-employed)

Median earnings have risen by more than 150,000 SEK over the observation period and in parallel for women and men, with women having more than 50,000 SEK lower earnings than men (Figure 17). During the crisis in the 1990s, earnings remained constant, but in all other periods there was a steady increase with the exception of a small dip around the financial crisis in 2008. The split by education groups in Figure 18 supports this, with earnings in all educational groups rising rather equally. The lowest-education group sees a slightly smaller increase starting in the 2000s than the higher-educated individuals.


400 000

350 000

300 000

250 000

200 000

150 000

100 000

Year



Figure 18. Median real gross individual earnings, by sex and education, over time

Male: ISCED 0-2	Male: ISCED 3-5
Male: ISCED 6-8	Female: ISCED 0-2
Female: ISCED 3-5	Female: ISCED 6-8
550 000
500 000
450 000
400 000
350 000
300 000
250 000
200 000
150 000
100 000

Year
Looking at inequality, Figure 19 shows that labour earnings inequality for women is higher than for men. While women's inequality had a surge and subsequent decline from the mid-1990s to 2008, it is now at a similar level to 1985. Men's earnings inequality started at a much lower level in 1985 and rose sharply until its peak in 1994, although never attaining the same level as female earnings inequality. After its peak it declined a bit, remaining relatively stable until 2005, after which it declined a bit again. However, it remains significantly higher in 2018 than it was in 1985.


All	Male	Female
0.34
0.33
0.32
0.31
0.30
0.29
0.28
0.27
0.26
0.25

Year

Figure 20 shows the Gini coefficient for individual labour earnings and total employer costs. Since employer costs in Sweden are a percentage of earnings (except for some reductions for young and old workers for specific years), there is very little difference in the Gini coefficient of these two measures. The small difference that occurs results from the fact that there are no employer costs for self- employed.



Figure 20. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings and total employer costs, over time

Gross individual earnings	Employer cost
0.34

0.33

0.32

0.31

0.30

0.29

0.28

Year

Figure 21 shows that the 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of earnings move roughly in parallel for both genders. While men start at a much lower level, they see a sharp increase in the early 1990s before the ratios



decrease again until they attain pre-crisis level in 2018. Female inequality rises continually until its peak around 2004, with only a slight additional increase during the crisis. It then declines sharply to regain its 1985 level again by the end of the observation period.



Figure 21. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time
All: 90:10 ratio	Male: 90:10 ratio	Female: 90:10 ratio
All: 50:10 ratio	Male: 50:10 ratio	Female: 50:10 ratio

9.0	6.0


8.0

5.0



7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0


2.0	0.0

Year
Figure 22 shows the growth in earnings across the distribution for four different periods. It illustrates how earnings growth is fairly even across the upper part of the distribution. The period 1985-93 is unique in that the lowest percentiles see a decrease in earnings, while they have relatively higher earnings growth rates in all other periods. The crisis period 1993-2001 even exhibits growth rates of nearly 9% for men in the lowest percentiles, but also a significant gender gap in growth rates. Figure 23 shows that including employer taxes makes nearly no difference to the trends.

periods
9	9
7	7
5	5
3	3
1	1
-1	-1
-3	-3
-5	-5



9	9
7	7
5	5
3	3
1	1
-1	-1
-3	-3
-5	-5



------
All
------
Female
------
Male


Figure 23. Annualised growth in gross earnings and employer cost by earnings percentile, selected periods

7	7
5	5
3	3
1	1
-1	-1
-3	-3


7	7

5	5

3	3

1	1

-1	-1

-3	-3


------
Gross individual
earnings
------
Employer cost

4.5 Self-employment

Self-employment is not very common in Sweden. The share of self-employed over all workers starts around 9% in 1985 and decreases over time to less than 6%. Of this about two thirds are solo self- employed and the rest are other self-employed. The share of employees is very high, with around 90- 94% of all workers in an employment situation (Figure 24).






20%
18%
16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%

All self-employed	Solo self-employed Other self-employed	Employees (right axis)




100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%





Note: Sample is the Swedish population aged 25-60. 'Solo self-employed' are self-employed without employees, 'Other self- employed' includes self-employed with employees and family workers.
Figure 25 looks at how the rate of self-employment differs by sex and education. Males and lower- educated workers are more likely to be self-employed than women and highly qualified individuals.


Figure 25. Share self-employed by sex and education, over time
Male ISCED 0-2	Male ISCED 3-5
Male ISCED 6-8	Male All
Female ISCED 0-2	Female ISCED 3-5
Female ISCED 6-8	Female All
18%
16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%



Note: Sample is the Swedish population aged 25-60.



The share of self-employed by percentile of individual disposable earnings (Figure 26) exhibits a clear negative relationship for all years. The largest variation across time takes place in the bottom 10% of the disposable income distribution. The last year of our data, 2021, shows the highest share of self- employed between the second and third percentiles. This could be a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic, where being employed guaranteed a certain income stability, while self-employment did not. However, more research is necessary to confirm this speculation.
Figure 26. Share self-employed by percentile of individual disposable earnings, selected years
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
0	5	10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  60  65  70  75  80  85  90  95
1985	1993	2001	2009	2021


Note: Sample is the Swedish population aged 25-60.

5. Labour market institutions
This section focuses on labour market institutions which impact labour market outcomes. We look at minimum wages and union density.

5.1 Minimum wage and unions

Sweden does not have minimum wage at the national level, instead wages are mainly negotiated by the unions in each sector. In Figure 27, we instead show the effective minimum wage (as monthly full-time equivalent wage), being the lowest wage observed in the data by year until 2014. We exclude some obvious outliers. After 2014, we have more exact measures of negotiated minimum wages by sector, which we extracted from collective agreements documented by the Swedish National Mediation Office. Only about 35% of all existing collective contracts contain negotiated minimum wages (Hällberg and Kjellström, 2020). We use the lowest negotiated wage by sector for workers at least 25 years old, but not necessarily with any prior education or work experience. We match these wages to the individual workers by sector, and then take the minimum to get the minimum wage. The ratio of the minimum to the median wage is relatively high for both the net wage and labour cost. However, the share of workers earning less than 1.2 times the minimum wage is extremely low. Until 2013, it is almost zero, which is due to the minimum wage being measured as the observed minimum wage. This likely captures more irregular wages than official wages. Still, the proportion of those with less than 1.2 times the minimum wage after 2014 also never crosses the 6% mark. Labour cost in Sweden is a share of the wage, which is why the ratios of minimum wage to median wage and minimum labour cost to median labour cost are very similar.



Figure 27. Bite of the minimum wage, over time







60%

Min. wage to P50 wage: net wage Min. wage to P50 wage: labor cost
 Proportion below 1.2x minimum wage (right axis)
6%

50%	5%
40%	4%
30%	3%
20%	2%
10%	1%
0%	0%

Note: Individuals aged 25-60. Employees and self-employed. Starting in 2014 we measure minimum wages according to collective agreements documented by the Swedish National Mediation Office (Medlingsinstitutet); before that we approximate minimum wages by using observed minimum wages. Data on wages comes from the full public sector and approximately 50% of the private sector. It is not weighted due to the lack of adequate weights.
Figure 28 shows union density for Sweden from 1985 onwards. Sweden has always had high union density rates even though there has been a visible decline until 2008. Since then, union density has decreased by only little to around 65% in 2019. Data on collective contract coverage rates come from



the OECD/AIAS ICTWSS7 database. This is supported by Hällberg and Kjellström from the Swedish National Mediation Office (Hällberg and Kjellström, 2020), which find that the share of employees covered by collective contracts is around 90% (in 2018).



Figure 28. Union density, over time
 Collective contract coverage rate	Union density
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%
70%
65%
60%
55%
50%



Note: Individuals age 15+ years of age. This data was only available until 2018/19.
Source: OECD/AIAS ICTWSS
























7 Initially developed by Prof. Jelle Visser at the University of Amsterdam (AIAS-HSI)

5.2 The effects of taxes and state benefits across the income distribution

Taxes and benefits are an important factor of the Swedish welfare system. Our database contains data on taxes from 1985. Disposable income is available from 1990. The gross income measure used is a sum of labour income, business income, capital income, benefits and pension income. As capital income is only available from 1991, the following figures cover the period 1991-2021. Figure 29 shows the share of household benefits among household gross income by household disposable income quartile. Benefits to the bottom quartile have increased more than 10 percentage points between 1991-1994, likely due to the crisis. Since 1994, the poorest quartile receives between 40% and 45% of its gross income as benefits. This share has decreased slightly over time but always close to or above 40%. The gap to the second poorest quartile is large; it only received about 23% of its income in benefits in 1994 and this share has decreased to less than 15% in 2021. The richest quartiles had between 6% and 12% of income in benefits in 1991 and have only between 3% and 7% of income in benefits in 2021.
Figure 29. Household benefits as a proportion of gross income, by household disposable income quartile
Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile
60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes and benefits have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Within each household disposable income quartile, the bottom and top two percentiles of the distribution of benefits as a proportion of gross income have been dropped. This adjustment was necessary to exclude outliers.

The Swedish tax system is progressive: the richest quartile pays a higher percentage of taxes relative to its gross income than the poorer quartiles. However, all shares have decreased over time (Figure 30). While taxes represented 38% of the richest quartile's gross income at its peak in 1998, and 33% of the poorest quartile's income, these numbers have decreased to 31% and 21%, respectively. The gap in taxes between the top and the bottom quartiles has thus widened over time. The similar taxes paid between the bottom three quartiles before 1998 disappear when including capital incomes in the household disposable income definition (see appendix Figure 50).



Figure 30. Taxes as a proportion of gross income, by household disposable income quartile
Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile
40%

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes and benefits have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Within each household disposable income quartile, the bottom and top two percentiles of the distribution of benefits as a proportion of gross income have been dropped. This adjustment was necessary to exclude outliers.

Disposable income includes benefits and subtracts taxes from earned income. It is thus a relevant concept when thinking about redistribution from the rich to the poor. Figure 31 shows how disposable income as proportion of gross income has changed over time. The trends for the highest three quartiles are rather similar to each other, while the poorest quartile has values that are about 15-20 percentage points higher. Overall, there has been a decrease in disposable income as a proportion of gross income in the 1990s and an increase after 2005. Since 2017, the level of the lowest quartile has decreased again by more than 10 percentage points. The level difference between the lowest and higher quartiles shows that the tax and benefit system are redistributing income from the richest three quartiles to the poorest quartile.
The same overall relationship holds for Figure 32, which includes employer social security contributions. However, when expressing disposable income as a share of gross income plus employer social security distributions, the levels decrease and there is less variation in the trends of the richest three quartiles.

Figure 31. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income, by household disposable income quartile
Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile
130%

120%

110%

100%

90%

80%

70%
1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021
Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes and benefits have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Within each household disposable income quartile, the bottom and top two percentiles of the distribution of benefits as a proportion of gross income have been dropped. This adjustment was necessary to exclude outliers.

Figure 32. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income and employer social security contributions, by household disposable income quartile
Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile
100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes and benefits have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Within each household disposable income quartile, the bottom and top two percentiles of the distribution of benefits as a proportion of gross income have been dropped. This adjustment was necessary to exclude outliers.



6. Household incomes
This section looks at trends in household incomes by examining household composition, assortative matching and trends in household earnings. We compare trends in gross household income and disposable household income to highlight the role of the tax and transfer system over the years. Finally, we look at inequality measures relating to household income.



6.1 Trends in household composition

Figure 33 shows the share of individuals who are married or cohabiting. Overall the share of married/cohabiting individuals has decreased since 1990 and is at a low level compared to other countries. The split by education group shows that this overall decline is most strongly driven by workers without high school education. Individuals with high school education or even higher have also seen a decrease over the years, albeit less pronounced. However, the share of married/cohabiting individuals among university graduates decreased in the early 2000s but rose again until 2012, since when it has very slightly decreased. This is the only educational group that has not experienced a clear decrease. Note that part of the shifts happening in 2000 is due to a change in the reporting of educational groups.

Figure 33. Share married/cohabiting, overall and by education, over time
ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8	All
75

70

65

60

55

50

45

40

Year
Note: Sample is the Swedish population aged 25-60. Marital status for same-sex couples without children is unobserved.

The correlation between earnings and cohabiting has increased over time for men (see Figure 34), but not for women. Women in lower earnings percentiles (but not at the very bottom) are slightly more likely to have a partner, while the opposite holds for men. There is a less pronounced positive correlation between earnings percentiles and having a working partner for men. For women, this relationship is very close to zero and for both it is persistent over time.

Figure 34. Share married/cohabiting and share with working partner, by sex and individual gross earnings percentile, selected years
Working: Married/cohabiting	Working: Has a working partner
 Non-working: Married/cohabiting	 Non-working: Has a working partner

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%













0  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Male gross earnings percentile

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%







1993, Females



0  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Female gross earnings percentile



100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%














0  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Male gross earnings percentile

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%



0  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Female gross earnings percentile



100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%












0  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Male gross earnings percentile

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%



0  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Female gross earnings percentile



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Married/cohabitating also includes civil partnerships, although we cannot observe them if no children exist in the partnership. The proportion with a working partner is conditional on being married/cohabiting.




Figure 35. Mean gross earnings percentile of partner/spouse by individual's gross earnings percentile,
selected years

75	75
65	65
55	55

45	45

35	35


25
0  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Female gross earnings percentile

25
0  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Male gross earnings percentile


--
1993
--
2001
¦
Not working: 1993
¦
Not working: 2001
--
2009
--
2021
?
Not working: 2009
¦
Not working: 2021
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Married/cohabitating also includes civil partnerships.

The positive correlation between the female and male percentile rank (in a partnership) in Figure 35 shows that high-earning males are typically in a marriage or partnership with high-earning females and that this correlation has increased across the years. Low-earning males are married or cohabiting with low-earning females to a greater extent than low-earning females with low-earning males. This means that it is more common for low-earning women to have a high-income partner than the opposite. While the trends across years overlap between 1993 and 2009, the trend for 2021 shows some differences. The slope for females is steeper at higher percentiles, which would mean that females with above- median earnings are more often married to or cohabiting with higher-income males than they were in previous years. The same holds for above-median earning males, but low-income males between the 10th and 30th percentile are actually married to or cohabiting with lower-income females more than before.

Figure 36. Share of individuals by position in the household, over time

¦ Other
¦ Adult child
¦ Couple, children
¦ Couple, no children
¦ Single, children
¦ Single, no children
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. 'Single, children' and 'couple, children' refer to households with at least one minor child. Parents of only adult children are categorised as 'other'.

The most common household positions in Sweden are a single household without children and a couple household with children (Figure 36). Both shares are relatively constant over time, with only a small increase in the share of single households without children. The share of single households with children and other households has also been very constant over time. However, the share of couples without children has decreased slightly to the benefit of single households.



Figure 37. Share of individuals by position in the household, by sex and education, over time

¦ Other
¦ Adult child
¦ Couple, children
¦ Couple, no children
¦ Single, children
¦ Single, no children
100%	100%
80%	80%
60%	60%


40%
20%
0%

40%
20%
0%




100%

Year


100%

Year

80%	80%
60%	60%


40%
20%
0%

40%
20%
0%


Year	Year

100%	100%
80%	80%
60%	60%


40%
20%
0%

40%
20%
0%


Year	Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. 'Single, children' and 'couple, children' refer to dependent children only. Parents of adult children are categorised as 'other'.
Unsurprisingly, the share of women in a single household with children is much higher than the same for men (Figure 37). In the event of separation or divorce, women still take care of the children more often. For high school dropouts, the share of single households with children has increased over time, at the expense of the share of couple households without children. All other shares have remained more or

less constant over time. There is a small shift in the year 2000, most clearly visible for the highly educated, which is likely due to a new education classification which was introduced around this time.

6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households

Figure 38 shows the changes in the share of individuals in a working household over time. After an initial decrease from 1990 to 1994, the share has remained relatively constant for all but the lowest education group. The share for university graduates has been around 95% since 1994, while the share for individuals with high school degree has increased by about 2 percentage points. These are all relatively small changes compared to the decrease from 92% in 1990 to 78% in 2021 for high school dropouts.

Figure 38. Share of individuals in a working household, overall and by education, over time
ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8	All
100%

95%

90%

85%

80%

75%

Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work.
Gross income and disposable income have risen continually and in parallel over the years for working households, but not for non-working households (see Figure 39). The gap in income between working and non-working households indeed doubled from 1990 to 2020.



Figure 39. Median real gross household earnings and disposable household income among working households, over time

Gross household earnings (working HHs)	Disposable household income (working HHs) Disposable household income (non-working HHs)	Disposable household income (all HHs)
400 000
350 000
300 000
250 000
200 000
150 000
100 000
50 000
0

Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. Gross household income is defined as the sum of labour income, benefits, capital income and pension income.

Figure 40 shows the change in gross household labour earnings and disposable household income by percentile for different time intervals. In the crisis years 1990-93 gross earnings grew less than disposable income (for the top 90 percentiles), meaning that transfers managed to smooth the income decrease. For all other periods, gross earnings exhibit similar or larger growth rates than disposable income, especially at the lower end of the earnings distribution. Since 1993, growth rates have been overall positive and relatively constant across the earnings distribution, with exception of the lowest 5% between 2001 and 2009 and the lowest 2% between 1993 and 2001 for disposable income. Even in the period 2009-21, which covers the first two years of the COVID-19 pandemic, the overall growth rates were positive.



Figure 40. Annualised growth in real gross household earnings and household disposable income for working households, by percentile, selected years



20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15

20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15




20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15

35

25

15

5

-5

-15




---
Disposable household income
---
Gross household earnings
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work.

6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households

Figure 41 shows the trends in median real disposable household income by education. Disposable income has increased for the two higher educational groups relatively equally. There are only small differences in the slopes of the trends. In 1990, the largest gap in household income was between individuals with a high school diploma and university graduates. Over the years, the gap between high school graduates and dropouts has increased, due to the income of individuals with less than high school education increasing much more slowly.

Figure 41. Median real disposable household income for all households, overall and by education, over time
ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8	All

380 000

330 000

280 000

230 000

180 000

130 000

Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Figure 42 shows inequality measures for household disposable income over the years. Both the Gini coefficient and relative poverty have risen over time. Relative poverty is defined as the share of individuals with less than 60% of median income. The increase in inequality at household level thus seems to be driven by a relative decrease at the lower end of the distribution. Relative poverty levels are above 10% and rising in Figure 42.8 The group that is below this threshold consists mostly of young workers (less than 20 years old) and part-time workers. The share of the top 1% has also increased over time, but less steadily. It has not yet crossed the 5% mark. When winsorising household disposable income at the 99th percentile, the level of the Gini coefficient shifts slightly downwards.



















8 Hällberg and Kjellström (2020) estimate the share of the population with wages lower than 60% of the median wage to be less than 1% in 2018.



Figure 42. Gini, relative poverty and top 1% share of disposable household income for all households, over time
Gini	Relative poverty
Gini (winsorised)	Top 1%'s share (right axis)
5%
25%

20%	4%

15%
3%
10%
2%
5%

0%	1%

Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Figure 43 shows that any increase in gross income inequality in the first half of the sample is driven by the lowest 10 percentiles. In more recent years, a slight increase in disposable income inequality is visible, again due to the bottom 10%.

Figure 43. Percentile ratios of disposable household incomes for all households, over time
90:10 Disposable	50:10 Gross
50:10 Disposable	90:10 Gross
90:50 Disposable	90:50 Gross
7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.



7. Immigrant outcomes


Figure 44. Share of immigrants in the population, 1985-2021
30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.


Sweden has had a very high immigration relative to its own population. In 1985, only about 12% of the population were born in other countries, most in the EU15 member states. In the early 2000s, the share of non-EU immigrants increased rapidly such that about 18% of the population are immigrants from non-EU countries and in total one fourth of the population is a first-generation immigrant (see Figure 44).
Figure 45 shows the share of immigrants across the disposable income distribution for various years. The highest share of immigrants is persistently found in the lower part of the income distribution. In accordance with Figure 44, we see an overall increase in the share of immigrants over time, but this increase is more pronounced among the lowest percentiles than at the top of the distribution. The exception is the year 2021, where there was a drop in the share of immigrants in the bottom decile of the population. This could be due to Covid-measures, which made it harder to immigrate to Sweden during 2021 for low-income individuals.

Figure 45. Share of immigrants in the population, across the disposable income distribution, 25-60 years of age, selected years

1993	2009	2021
0.60

0.50

0.40

0.30

0.20

0.10

0.00

Equivalised disposable income percentile


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Figure 46 breaks down the outcomes of immigrants relative to natives for the year 2019. In terms of gross individual and household income, immigrants are lagging behind natives. The same holds for the employment trends. Hours worked are very similar between immigrants and natives, with immigrants working only slightly less. The share of highly educated female immigrants is low relative to natives, but the share of highly educated is now higher among male immigrants than among native men.



Figure 46. Outcomes of immigrants relative to natives, ages 25-60, 2019
120%

100%

80%


60%

40%

20%

0%









Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.

8. References
Adermon, A., Laun, L., Lind, P., Olsson, M., Sauermann, J. and Sjögren, A., 2022. Earnings losses and the role of the welfare state during the COVID-19 pandemic: Evidence from Sweden. Working Paper 2022:20, Institute for Evaluation of Labour Market and Education Policy (IFAU).
Friedrich, B., Laun, L. and Meghir, C., 2022. Earnings dynamics of immigrants and natives in Sweden 1985-2016. Quantitative Economics, 13(4), 1803-47.
Hällberg, P. and Kjellström, C., 2020. Collective agreements and minimum wages. Report from the Swedish National Mediation Office, Stockholm.
Landais, C., Nekoei, A., Nilsson, P., Seim, D. and Spinnewijn, J., 2021. Risk-based selection in unemployment insurance: Evidence and implications. American Economic Review, 111(4), 1315-55.



9. Data appendix
We use data from the Longitudinal Integration Database for Health Insurance and Labour Market Studies (LISA), which is provided by Statistics Sweden, the Social Insurance Agency, and the Swedish Agency for Innovative Systems, and accessed via the Institute for Evaluation of Labour Market and Education Policy (IFAU) database. It contains annual information on education, earnings and governmental transfers for all individuals registered in Sweden aged 16 and older. From 1990 onwards, the register also includes information on marital status. Data for taxes paid is added from the tax registry (Inkomst- och Taxeringsregistret). We link these data to a population-wide matched employer- employee register (Jobbregistret), which covers all firms and workplaces in the private and public sectors, non-governmental organisations, and the self-employed. The matched employer-employee register contains information on the income earned for each individual at each workplace. Finally, we link the above administrative registers to the Wage Structure Statistics (Lönestrukturstatistiken) collected by the National Mediation Office and maintained by Statistics Sweden. Wage Structure Statistics is an annual survey of establishments and their workers, with information on the wages and working hours for all employees who worked at least 1 hour during the month measured. Wages are reported as full-time equivalent monthly wages and working hours as contracted working hours (expressed as a percentage of a full-time employment).9 To enhance comparison, we convert the monthly full-time equivalent wages to hourly wages for some figures by multiplying by 12 (for months in a year) and dividing by 1985.54, which is the number of hours worked per year on average (according to an estimate based on collective contracts).

The Wage Structure Statistics covers the universe of workplaces in the public sector and private-sector firms with at least 500 employees. For smaller private-sector firms, a random sample is drawn based on a cross-classification of industry and establishment size. In total, roughly 50% of all private-sector employees are covered. We do not weight because we do not consider the provided weights to be adequate. All three data sources described cover the time period 1985-2021. We express all earnings/income measures in 2019 prices (SEK).

We document trends in marriage and cohabitation rates during the time period 1990-2021, using the data on the full population of individuals in Sweden aged 16-64. Family links are provided in LISA through unique family identifiers. The register also contains information on marital status and household structure: it indicates whether an individual is in a same-sex partnership, is a married female/male with or without children, a single/divorced female/male with or without children, or is a child of a married/single/divorced/cohabiting couple. Cohabiting couples without joint children are not identified in the data. We thus consider an individual to be cohabiting if they are married, in a same-sex partnership, or in a cohabitation with joint children. These data allow us to calculate the number of adults and children in the household. To identify the age of each household member (including children), we combine the longitudinal individual register with the multigenerational register that contains links between children and their biological parents, with information on their year of birth.

For a handful of figures, we use aggregate data because the Swedish register data did not cover the required topics. For Figure 7, we use data from the OECD, retrieved on 19 May 2023, because we cannot observe unemployment spells in our data. The OECD provides data on unemployment overall and long- term unemployment, although this measure is missing for 2005 and 2006. For Figure 27, we collected data from various collective agreements documented by the Swedish National Mediation Office (Medlingsinstitutet), to approximate sectoral minimum wages. This was available from 2014. In Figure 28 we again make use of OECD data, more precisely the OECD ICTWSS data base. Unlike our other data sources, this data contains individuals aged 15 and older. Union density is not collected by Swedish register data, because this is private data and monitored by the unions. For the same reason, we cannot compute the share of workers covered by collective agreements.

9 Values higher than 100% were top-coded to 250%, but results remain unchanged if we instead drop these outliers from the sample.

10. Appendix charts
Figure 47. Share self-employed by percentile of individual gross earnings, selected years
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
0	5	10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  60  65  70  75  80  85  90  95
1985	1993	2001	2009	2021


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The 9th percentile has been omitted for 1985, as it was a strong outlier.


Figure 47 reproduces Figure 26 but with gross annual real income, which includes labour earnings, business income, benefits, capital income and pension income (if applicable).
The disposable income measure from our data includes capital incomes and capital gains/losses. We cannot split this measure to exclude capital gains/losses. Figures 26, 29-32, 39-43 and 45-46 therefore exclude the entire capital income measure from the consideration of disposable income. To show the differences that arise by this exclusion, Figures 48-59 reproduce the former figures with capital income included.


Figure 48. Share self-employed by percentile of individual disposable income, selected years
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
0	5	10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  60  65  70  75  80  85  90  95
1985	1993	2001	2009	2021


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.



Figure 49. Household benefits as a proportion of gross income, by household disposable income quartile
Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%

Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes and benefits have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Within each household disposable income quartile, the bottom and top two percentiles of the distribution of benefits as a proportion of gross income have been dropped. This adjustment was necessary to exclude outliers.

Figure 50. Taxes as a proportion of gross income, by household disposable income quartile


Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile
45%

40%

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes and benefits have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Within each household disposable income quartile, the bottom and top two percentiles of the distribution of benefits as a proportion of gross income have been dropped. This adjustment was necessary to exclude outliers.

Figure 51. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income, by household disposable income quartile
Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile
120%
115%
110%
105%
100%
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%
70%
1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021
Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes and benefits have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Within each household disposable income quartile, the bottom and top two percentiles of the distribution of benefits as a proportion of gross income have been dropped. This adjustment was necessary to exclude outliers.

Figure 52. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income and employer social security contributions, by household disposable income quartile
Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile
90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes and benefits have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Within each household disposable income quartile, the bottom and top two percentiles of the distribution of benefits as a proportion of gross income have been dropped. This adjustment was necessary to exclude outliers.



Figure 53. Median real gross household earnings and disposable household income among working households, over time
Gross household earnings (working HHs)
400 000
350 000
300 000
250 000
200 000
150 000
100 000
50 000
0

Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work.

Figure 54. Annualised growth in real gross household earnings and household disposable income for working households, by percentile, selected years


20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15

20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15




20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15

20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15


--
Disposable household income
--
Gross household earnings
Note: Sample is individuals Sample is individuals aged 25-60 in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work.



Figure 55. Median real disposable household income for all households, overall and by education, over time
ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8	All
400 000

350 000

300 000

250 000

200 000

150 000

100 000

Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.

Figure 56. Gini, relative poverty and top 1% share of disposable household income for all households, over time

Gini	Relative poverty
Gini (winsorised)	Top 1%'s share (right axis)
35%	9%

30%	8%
7%
25%
6%
20%
5%
15%
4%
10%
3%
5%	2%

0%	1%

Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.



Figure 57. Percentile ratios of disposable household incomes for all households, over time
90:10 Disposable	50:10 Gross
50:10 Disposable	90:10 Gross
90:50 Disposable	90:50 Gross
7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.


Figure 58. Share of immigrants in the population, across the disposable income distribution, 25-60 years of age, selected years

1993	2009	2021
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

Equivalized disposable income percentile


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.

Figure 59. Outcomes of immigrants relative to natives, aged 25-60
120%

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%





Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.




























































































































































































lnstitute for Fiscal Studies

Country Studies: Inequalities in Europe and North America
A parallel study to the IFS Deaton Review

Egbert Jongen Jim Been
Koen Caminada Heike Vethaak




Inequality in the Netherlands: 1973-2022






















Inequality in the Netherlands: 1973-2022
Egbert Jongen, Jim Been, Koen Caminada and Heike Vethaak
Contents
1. Executive summary	2
Education, employment, hours and earnings	2
Labour market institutions	2
Household composition and incomes	3
2. Institutional background	4
Social insurance	4
Tax and transfer system	5
COVID-19 policy response	5
3. Notes on measurement and definitions	6
4. Education, employment, hours and earnings	8
4.1 Trends in employment	8
4.2 Trends in hours worked per week	12
4.3 Trends in annual wages	14
4.4 Trends in annual earnings	18
4.5 Self-employment	24
5. Labour market institutions	27
6. Household composition and incomes	31
6.1 Trends in household composition	31
6.2 Household earnings and disposable incomes among working households	35
6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households	38
7. Immigrants and natives	40
8. References	43
9. Appendix: additional charts	45


















(c) Institute for Fiscal Studies	1

1. Executive summary
Education, employment, hours and earnings
The Netherlands witnessed a strong rise in the education level of women, their employment rate and their average earnings level, and a substantial drop in earnings inequality among working women. One of the key developments in the Netherlands over the past decades has been the steep increase in the employment rate of women, from 20% in the early 1970s to more than 80% in 2022 (women 25-60 years of age). Indeed, whereas many women left the labour market around childbearing age in the 1970s, this drop has largely disappeared in recent years. There was also an increase in hours worked per week by working women, but this increase was
rather modest, from 26 hours per week in 1990 to 30 hours per week in 2022. The past decades have also witnessed a strong increase in the average level of education of women. Related to the increase in education and hours worked, the median level of earnings of women has almost doubled since the late 1970s. Furthermore, inequality in earnings among working women has come down substantially.
The story is quite different for men, though there was some rise in their education level as well, their employment rate declined somewhat, the real earnings of working men hardly increased and earnings inequality among working men increased. Furthermore, compared to women, changes for men have been more modest over the past five decades. The average education level of men has increased. However, employment rates have come down somewhat for men 25-60 years of age (mostly for men 25-44 years of age, while increasing for men 45-75 years of age). Hours worked per week by working men have been stable (at least since 1990). A striking finding is that median earnings of men have hardly increased (+4%) since the late 1970s.
Furthermore, earnings inequality among working men has increased. Of note is also the rise in (solo) self-employment among men, a trend that is largely absent for women.
Women have closed the gap when it comes to education, closed most of the gap in the employment rate, but still work substantially fewer hours than men on average and also earn substantially less than men. Considering the joint distribution of both men and women, we find an increase in the level of education and the employment rate, where women have more than closed the gap in the average level of education with men and narrowed the gap in the employment rate to under 10 percentage points in 2022. However, sizeable gaps between men and women remain in hours worked per week: 30 hours per week for women compared to 38 hours per week for men in 2022, and in earnings,  28,797 per year for women compared to
 44,636 per year for men in 2022 (in 2019 prices). Overall earnings inequality considering both men and women has only increased slightly since the late 1970s, but this is the net result of larger opposing changes for men and women and an increasing share of working women with relatively low and dispersed earnings.

Labour market institutions
After an initial decline, the share of workers close to the minimum wage has been increasing since the mid-2000s, union membership has declined, but coverage of collective labour agreements remains high. The relevance of the minimum wage declined in the 1980s, as minimum wages were 'frozen'. However, since the mid-2000s, the share of workers earning up to 120% of the minimum wage has increased. The share of employees who are members of a union dropped from 38% in 1970 to 17% in 2019, but the share of employees covered by a collective labour agreement has remained stable at around 80%. Hence, unions still play an important part in wage determination in the Netherlands. The share of gross social insurance benefits has increased for the bottom quartile of the disposable income distribution, but declined
for the other quartiles, following the increase in enrolment in various types of social insurance during the 1980s. Direct taxes have declined as a share of gross income over time. Disposable income as a share of gross income has been trending upward, indicating that effective average



tax rates have declined, though the rise is less pronounced once we consider disposable income as a share of employer cost.

Household composition and incomes
The share of men and women who are single has risen; for women we see an increase for all levels of education, while for men we see it mostly among the lower educated. Moving from individuals to households, the share of individuals living in a couple is declining and the share of singles with and without dependent children is increasing. The increase in singles with children is concentrated among lower- and intermediate-educated women (most children of separated
parents live with the mother), whereas for higher-educated women we mostly see an increase in singles without children. The increase in singles without children is particularly strong for lower- educated men, whereas there is almost no increase for higher-educated men. Indeed, the share of men who have a partner has declined most for men with relatively low earnings, whereas the decline in the share of women who have a partner is more evenly spread across the earnings distribution of women. We also find that the increase in the share of men who have a working partner is lower for men with relatively low earnings than for men with relatively high earnings, whereas for women the decline in the share of women who have a working partner is more evenly spread across the earnings distribution of women and also more modest.
Within couples, we have seen the emergence of assortative matching in the Netherlands. Around 1980 there was almost no relation between the average earnings of men and women in (opposite-sex) couples. In 2019 we see that men with relatively low earnings are more likely to be in a couple with a woman with relatively low earnings, and men with relatively high earnings are more likely to be in a couple with a woman with relatively high earnings.
Median gross and disposable household income have been growing over time, mostly due to the higher employment rate and earnings of women. Median gross household earnings have been increasing more or less steadily over time (with a temporary dip after the Great Recession), which is mostly due to the higher employment rate and earnings level of women. Median disposable household income across all households has also been increasing more or less
steadily (with a temporary dip in the early 1980s during the economic recession). However, the median disposable household income of households without a working adult has hardly increased in real terms since the late 1970s.
There has been some increase in inequality in real equivalised disposable income across households and the top income shares, and a strong rise in relative poverty. Overall household income inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient has increased somewhat since the late 1970s. The rise in female participation has been across the board, but bigger in percentages at the lower end. While there has been an increase in assortative matching in couples, wages of
women at the lower end of the wage distribution grew faster than the average. The income share of the top 1% has increased, though remains low by international standards. At the lower end of the income distribution, we see a strong rise in the share of individuals who live in relative poverty, which is related to the rising share of singles and lone parents.
Another important dimension of inequality is the difference between migrants and natives. This issue is becoming increasingly relevant for the Dutch society, as the share of migrants in the population is steadily increasing. The increase in the share of immigrants has been more pronounced at the lower end of the income distribution, which has contributed to the increase in inequality at the bottom of the income distribution. There is a persistent gap in relative poverty between immigrants and natives. The lower disposable income of immigrants than of natives is partly driven by their lower education level, which feeds into lower employment rates and lower earnings.
The COVID-19 crisis was a mere blip in terms of labour market outcomes and incomes compared to long-run trends. Indeed, there was only a minor drop in employment at the start of the COVID-19 crisis in 2020, but the economy, labour market outcomes and incomes quickly recovered.

2. Institutional background
In this section we briefly summarise the key institutional features of the social insurance system and the tax and transfer system in the Netherlands.

Social insurance
Unemployment insurance benefits are available to former employees who were working at least 26 weeks in the 36 weeks prior to unemployment. The gross replacement rate is 75% of the previous wage (up to a maximum) for the first 2 months, and then drops to 70% of the previous wage, which is the level up to the maximum benefit duration of 2 years. Benefits are financed via an employer premium that depends on the wage. Over the past decades there has been a shortening of the maximum benefit duration. Before 2016 the maximum benefit duration was 3 years and 2 months, and before 2006 the maximum benefit duration was 5 years.
Social assistance (welfare) benefits are available for unemployed individuals who do not (or no longer) qualify for unemployment insurance but pass a means test (insufficient partner income and/or wealth). The level of the social assistance is tied to the minimum wage. Couples on social assistance benefits receive 100% of the minimum wage, while singles on social assistance benefits receive 70% of the minimum wage.
Disability insurance benefits provide income support to individuals who are unable to work due to health reasons. The gross replacement rate is 75% of the previous wage for individuals who are fully and permanently disabled, and lower for other disabled individuals. Benefits are financed via an employer premium that depends on the wage. Before entering disability insurance, workers with health issues can be on sick leave for a maximum of 2 years. The last major reform of the disability insurance scheme was in 2006. For a detailed account of changes in disability insurance in the Netherlands see Koning and Lindeboom (2015).
Health insurance in the Netherlands is not tied to employment. Individuals are free to choose their private health insurer, and receive a universal basic in-kind health insurance package which they can top up by paying additional premiums, for example, for physiotherapy and dental costs. Health insurance, including dental costs, is free for children up to 18 years of age. Health insurance is financed out of an annual fee for individuals that they pay to their private insurer, an employers' premium which depends on gross wages, and general taxation.
Changes in (early) retirement benefits are also relevant for the analysis below, even though the focus is on the 25-60 age group. Retirement benefits consist of pay-as-you-go state pension benefits, pension occupational benefits and (also tax-favoured) private retirement savings benefits. State benefits depend on the years of residence in the Netherlands (2% per year living in the Netherlands, up to a maximum of 100% of the state pension) and occupational benefits depend on previous earnings and are financed out employee and employer premiums that depend on the wage. The median net replacement rate of pension benefits (including private tax- favoured pension savings) is 82%, but there is a lot of heterogeneity over individuals and households (Knoef et al., 2017). The age at which individuals qualify for the state pension benefits was 65 until 2012, after which it started increasing gradually, so that in 2023 the statutory retirement age is 66 years and 10 months. Individuals can retire earlier, using their occupational pensions with an actuarial fair deduction and/or private (retirement) savings. Early retirement benefits used to be much more generous in the period before 2006, which stimulated earlier cohorts to retire earlier, even in their late 50s. For an analysis of the labour market effects of reforms in (early) retirement benefits see Rabat  et al. (2023).


Tax and transfer system
Income tax is levied on individual income. In 2023 there are two tax brackets, with statutory rates of 36.93% up to  73.032 and 49.5% on income above that level. The number of income tax brackets has declined over the past decades, as have the top income tax rate and statutory tax rates (Caminada et al., 2021). Meanwhile, indirect taxes, such as value-added tax and excise duties, have increased.
There are a number of non-refundable tax credits that reduce personal income tax (De Boer and Jongen, 2020). There is a general tax credit that is phased out beyond a certain income level.
There is an earned income tax credit that has a steep phase-in and phase-out range. There is also a specific earned income tax credit for lone parents and secondary earners with children up to 12 years of age. These latter two tax credits have increased substantially over the past two decades.
Next to tax credits, the Netherlands has various income-dependent benefits that depend on household income. This includes a child benefit for households with dependent children, a housing benefit for renters and a benefit to cover health insurance costs. These benefits are targeted at lower incomes, and are phased out beyond a certain income level. Working lone parents and dual-earner couples with children in formal child care also qualify for an income- dependent child subsidy per hour of child care, which declines with household income beyond a certain income level.

COVID-19 policy response
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Netherlands relied heavily on a short-time work scheme, allowed firms to defer their tax payments, provided subsidies for the costs of fixed capital and provided income support for the self-employed. For an overview of the most important policy responses and the labour market developments during 2020 and 2021 see Jongen et al. (2021).

3. Notes on measurement and definitions
In this section we briefly outline the main datasets, definitions and splits into groups used in the analysis.

Datasets and time periods
? The data on education, employment, hours worked, contract type and household type are taken (mostly - exceptions are indicated in the notes to the figures) from the Dutch Labour Force Survey (Enquete Beroepsbevolking, EBB) and its predecessor, the Dutch Labour Force Count (Arbeidskrachtentelling, AKT). Data from the EBB (approximately 164,000 individuals in households) are available annually for the period 1987-2022, with (larger) breaks in the years 2003 and 2013. Data from the AKT are available biannually for the period 1973-1985. These datasets are accessible via remote access at Statistics Netherlands.

? The data on incomes are taken (mostly - exceptions are indicated in the notes to the figures) from the integral administrative personal and household income files (Inpatab and Inhatab, respectively) and the administrative Income Panel (Inkomenspanelonderzoek, IPO). The integral files include all Dutch citizens and are available annually for the period 2011-21. The IPO (approximately 90,000 individuals in households) is available for the years 1977, 1981, 1985 and 1987-2014, with a (larger) break in the year 2000 (for which, however, we observe both the incomes according to the old and the new sample definition). Statistics Netherlands and Leiden University have recently made the IPO (as) consistent (as possible) with the integral files for the period 1977-2014 (Caminada et al., 2021). These datasets are also accessible via remote access at Statistics Netherlands.
Unit of analysis and sample
? The sample in the main text consists of individuals 25-60 years of age, unless indicated otherwise. For figures on wages and earnings, the sample is further restricted to individuals (or households where applicable) with strictly positive wages or earnings, respectively. There are no further restrictions for the household income figures.

? Individuals are the unit of analysis throughout. For example, when analysing equivalised household income, each individual is allocated their respective equivalised household income, so that the specific household income is counted as many times as there are individuals aged 25-60 in the household.

? We exclude observations with negative values for disposable household income from the graphs with disposable household income.

? We use the sampling weights for the EBB (and the AKT) and the IPO to arrive at nationally representative averages.

Definitions:
? Employment rate: the fraction of the population that is employed according to the self- reported employment status in the EBB.

? Earnings: gross annual real individual earnings (including self-employment income).

o If a worker has multiple jobs, earnings from all jobs are summed together.



o Earnings include employee contributions and taxes but typically do not include employer contributions and taxes (in particular, employer pension contributions). Some figures explicitly compare trends in gross earnings with and without employer contributions and taxes.

o Data on annual wages, earnings and income are all administrative data, collected by the Tax Office and the Social Security Agency, available via remote access at Statistics Netherlands. Consistent series on hourly wages are only available for a short period and not included in the analysis.

o Income in kind (e.g., benefits of vehicles, computers and mobile phones purchased by the business that are also for personal use) are not included in the earnings concept used in the analysis.

o Nominal earnings are converted into real terms in calendar year 2019, using the Consumer Price Index (CPI) from Statistics Netherlands.

? Hours of work: usual/ typical paid hours worked per week, including overtime. We calculate hours worked for employees only (excluding the self-employed).

? Wages: individual real annual gross earnings. We calculate earnings for employees only. We convert nominal earnings into real terms in calendar year 2019, using the CPI of Statistics Netherlands.

? Disposable household income (household equivalised income after deducting taxes and adding benefits)

o The main measure of household income used in this report is income before housing costs have been deducted, and after direct taxes and premiums have been deducted from and transfers have been added to household income.

o Income includes: earnings from employment, profit or loss from self-employment, social insurance benefits, social assistance, pension benefits (state, occupational and private pensions) and income from wealth.

o Income is net of: income taxes, social insurance premiums, healthcare premiums and contributions to occupational and private pensions schemes.

o Incomes are equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale, normalised to a single individual.

o We convert nominal incomes into real terms in calendar year 2019, using the CPI of Statistics Netherlands.

Splits:
? Sex: female, male.

? Education: the education variables are split into the following three groups based on the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED): ISCED 0-2, ISCED 3-5 and ISCED 6-8.

? Household type: Single without dependent children; single with dependent children; couples without dependent children; couples with dependent children; adult child; other. A dependent child is a child aged 0-17.

4. Education, employment, hours and earnings
4.1 Trends in employment
Over the past decades, the Netherlands has seen a steep rise in the employment rate of prime working age women (aged 25-60). Their employment rate started at just 20% in the early 1970s and then rose steadily to over 80% in 2022 (Figure 1). This increase reflects changes in preferences for work (Statistics Netherlands and Social Cultural Office, 2020), the increased level of education (Euwals et al., 2011; CPB, 2018) and the increased availability of affordable child care and reductions in participation tax rates for secondary earners (Bosch and van der Klaauw, 2012;
Bettendorf et al., 2015). Indeed, Figure 2 shows that the participation rate of women of childbearing age has increased the most. Since the turn of the century, the participation rate of women aged 61-74 has also increased, in part because early retirement and alternative pathways to retirement have become financially less attractive, and the upward shift of the statutory retirement age (Euwals et al., 2010; Lindeboom and Montizaan, 2020; Rabat  et al. 2023). After an initial decline in the participation rate of young women (aged 16-24) until the mid-1980s, due to increased participation in education and the rise in unemployment in response to the recession in the 1980s (Figure 7), their participation rate increased until the beginning of the 2000s, but this increase has slowed down since then.

The employment rate of prime working-age men has declined somewhat since the early 1970s. The employment rate of prime working-age men declined between the early 1970s and the mid-1990s, but has increased since then (Figure 1). This partly reflects the initial rise in the use of social insurance and early retirement and the subsequent decline in the use of these schemes, as it became harder and financially less attractive to enter these schemes (Rabat  et al., 2023). The
drop in the employment rate of men seems to be concentrated among men 25-44 years of age (Figure 2; for an exploration of potential mechanisms, see CPB, 2021). After a steep drop in the employment rate of men aged 61-74 in the 1970s and 1980s, as many older workers were sent into early retirement and disability insurance, their employment rate increased again in recent decades, as early retirement became less generous, the statutory retirement age was increased, the eligibility criteria for disability insurance became tighter and the maximum duration of unemployment insurance benefits was cut substantially (Rabat  et al., 2023). For young men and women (aged 16-24) we find a similar pattern, with a somewhat steeper decline in the 1970s to the mid-1980s, but with a recovery up to around 2000, and a more or less flat profile after that.

Education levels have increased, and women have more than closed the gap with men. From now on we focus on individuals aged 25-60. Since 1990, the share of people with lower education (ISCED 0-2; Figure 3) has declined and the share of those with higher education (ISCED 6-8) has increased, while the share with intermediate education (ISCED 3-5) has remained more or less stable. The increase in the share of higher-educated women has been particularly strong (Figure 4), and in 2022 slightly more women are higher educated than men (among the 25-60 age group).

Since 1990, there has been an increase in the employment rate of women for all levels of education, while the employment rate of men has hardly changed for all levels of education. Average employment rates have increased for all education levels (Figure 5). If we look by gender, we see that the employment rate increases for all levels of education for women, though rising somewhat more strongly for lower-educated women (Figure 6). The employment rate for men has been rather stable since 1990 for each level of education, though there has been some overall
increase for men as the share of higher-educated men increases and higher-educated men have somewhat higher employment rates than lower-educated men.

The impact of the COVID-19 crisis on employment rates was a mere blip when compared to long-run trends. There was only a small drop in employment in early 2020, mostly for lower educated (see Figure 5), but employment rates quickly recovered. For further analyses of this period see Jongen et al. (2021).



Figure 1. Employment rates by age and sex, over time

Notes: Own calculations using the EBB for 1987-2020 and the AKT for 1973-85 (even years are interpolated). Breaks in the series in 1986 (all groups) and 2013 (most notably for ages 16-24).


Figure 2. Employment rates over life cycle by sex, selected years


Notes: Own calculations using the EBB for 1987, 1997, 2007 and 2019, and the AKT for 1977. Breaks in 1986 (all groups) and 2013 (most notably for ages 16-24).




Notes: Own calculations using the EBB. Sample is individuals aged 25-60.


Figure 4. Educational attainment by sex, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the EBB. Sample is individuals aged 25-60.



Figure 5. Employment rates by education, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the EBB. Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Breaks in the series in 2013.


Figure 6. Employment rates by sex and education, over time

Notes: Own calculations using the EBB. Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Breaks in the series in 2013.



Notes: Authors' calculations using Statline of Statistics Netherlands. Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Unemployment rate is calculated as the unemployed fraction of the labour force aged 25-60, split into short-term (less than 12 months) and long-term (12 months or longer) unemployment. Break in the share of short- and long-term unemployed in 2011.

4.2 Trends in hours worked per week
Since 1990, hours worked per week of employees have remained rather stable for men, but since 2005 have increased somewhat for women. Hours worked for men (employees) have hovered around 38 hours per week over the past three decades (Figure 8). Hours worked for women remained fixed at around 25 hours per week over the period 1990-2004, but have increased somewhat since then to 30 hours per week in 2022. The increase in child care subsidies and tax credits for secondary earners from 2005 onwards may have played a role in
that (Bettendorf et al., 2015), together with the strong increase in the share of higher-educated women who work on average more hours per week than lower- and intermediate-educated women (Figure 9). Note that hours worked per week are very similar across education levels for men, whereas (working) higher-educated women work more hours per week than lower- educated women. Also note that these hours worked per week are relatively low by international standards. Indeed, the Netherlands is still by far number 1 in the world when it comes to part-time work (35% of all employed worked part-time in 2022, compared to 16% on average for the OECD; see OECD, 2023).



Figure 8. Mean hours worked among employees, overall and by sex, over time

Notes: Own calculations using the EBB. Sample is employees aged 25-60.



Figure 9. Mean hours worked among employees, by sex and education, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the EBB. Sample is employees aged 25-60.

4.3 Trends in annual wages
The gender gap in median wages has been decreasing. In Figure 10 we show the level of median real annual wages for employees (including their profit income, but excluding individuals whose primary income comes from self-employment) over the period 1977-2021, for all employees and for employees by sex. Median real wages over the joint distribution of men and women have been rather stable over the past 40 years, despite the increase in the education level. For men, median real wages have only increased by about 4%, to around  44,000 in 2021 (at 2019 prices). For women, median real wages have almost doubled (+88%) to around  28,000 in 2021 (at 2019 prices). The level of female median wages was 35% of male median wages in 1977. This increased to 64% in 2021, hence the gender gap in wages has decreased substantially, but still remains sizeable.

Wage profiles over the life cycle are much steeper for men than for women, in particular for the higher educated. In Figure 11 we see that the development in median real wages over the life cycle (note that these are cross-sectional data) differs quite a lot between men and women, and also by level of education. For men, real wages increase for all educational levels but most substantially among higher-educated men. For higher-educated women, we find the most
substantial increases prior to the age of 30. Lower-educated and intermediate-educated women show almost no growth beyond the age of 30. Indeed, the gender gap in wages opens up mostly after the age of 30, when children arrive.

The Gini coefficient of overall median wages has been increasing somewhat over time. Figure 12 shows long-term trends in wage inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient. Overall, wage inequality has increased somewhat, with most of the increase happening before 2000. However, when we decompose this by gender, we observe two opposing trends. For men, we find substantially lower inequality than for women, but their Gini coefficient has been increasing quite a bit. For women, inequality was much higher, but their Gini coefficient has decreased substantially over time.

Wage inequality has decreased across the earnings distribution for women. Figure 13 analyses wage inequality using 90:10 and 50:10 ratios, revealing more about the lower and upper tails of the wage distribution. Overall, both the 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of earnings have decreased to a similar extent, which means that earnings inequality has decreased across the whole wage distribution. This trend is primarily driven by the large decrease in wage inequality among women. For men, we find that both the 90:10 and 50:10 ratios have increased over time.
Wage growth has been higher among women in the lower wage percentiles. In Figure 14 we show the average annual real wage growth for three consecutive periods of (about) 13 years: 1981-94, 1994-2007 and 2007-19. For men, real wages have only grown (somewhat) among the higher wage percentiles. At the bottom of the wage distribution, real wages have decreased.
Women's real wage growth shows a different pattern. Growth was positive in all three periods for the whole wage distribution of women. Furthermore, women at the lower end of the wage distribution show higher growth rates than women further up the wage distribution.
The COVID-19 crisis has hardly affected wage growth. Indeed, in part due to the short-time work schemes, wages continued to grow on an annual basis during 2020 and 2021.



Figure 10. Median real annual wages, overall and by sex, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is employees aged 25-
60. Wages are in 2019 prices. Note that these are wages, not hourly wages. Breaks in the series in 2000 and 2011.


Figure 11. Median real annual wages by age, sex and education in 2019


Notes: Own calculations using the EBB of 2019. These are cross-sectional earnings (wages plus potential profits or losses) for employees only. Differences are due to differences in hours and differences in earnings per hour.

Figure 12. Gini coefficient of real annual wages, overall and by sex, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is employees aged 25-
60. Breaks in the series in 2000 and 2011.


Figure 13. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of real wages, overall and by sex, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is employees aged 25-
60. Breaks in the series in 2000 and 2011.



Figure 14. Annualised growth in real wages by wages percentile, by sex, selected periods




Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is employees aged 25-
60. Breaks in the series in 2000 and 2011.

4.4 Trends in annual earnings
The trends in median real earnings (wages and profit income) are very similar to the trends in median real wages, increasing strongly for women but hardly increasing for men. In the following graphs we now include the self-employed in the sample and analyse the earnings of wage earners and self-employed combined. Similar to Figure 10, median real (gross) earnings of individuals have been relatively stable over time, except for a slight decrease during the 1990s (Figure 15). However, there are substantial differences by gender, both in the levels and the
growth rate. Among men, median real earnings show a slight increase over time of about 4%, up to about  45,000 in 2021 (at 2019 prices). Among women, median real earnings show a substantial increase over time of about 91% since 1977, reaching about  29,000 in 2021 (at 2019 prices).

The Gini coefficient of earnings for both men and women has increased slightly over time, the net effect of a strong decline for women and a rise for men. Figure 16 shows long-term trends in gross individual earnings inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient. Overall, earnings inequality has been trending up slightly, though it has been quite stable since the mid-1990s.
However, decomposed by gender, we observe two opposing trends, similar to the trends in wages. For men, who show substantially lower inequality than women, the Gini has increased over time. For women, the Gini coefficient of individual earnings has decreased substantially.

The Gini coefficient of employer costs follows a pattern quite similar to earnings. Similar to the Gini coefficients of gross individual earnings and real wages, we find that the inequality in employer costs has also increased slightly (Figure 17).

Earnings inequality has decreased for women across the earnings distribution, and increased for men. Figure 18 analyses gross individual earnings inequality by 90:10 and 50:10 ratios which, in contrast to the Gini in Figure 16 and 17, put more emphasis on the lower and upper tails of the earnings distribution. Overall, both 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of earnings have decreased similarly over time, meaning that earnings inequality has decreased at both the lower and higher ends of the earnings distributions. This trend is primarily driven by the large decreases in inequality among women. For men, we find that both 90:10 and 50:10 ratios have slightly increased over time. These trends are largely similar to the trends in wages observed in Figure 13.



Earnings growth has been higher among women at the lower earnings percentiles. In Figure 19, we show the average annual earnings growth for three consecutive periods. The patterns and percentages are very similar to wages in Figure 14.

Growth in gross earnings and employer costs has been concentrated at the lower end of the earnings distribution. Figure 20 shows the growth in gross earnings and employer costs by earnings percentile for the periods 1981-94, 1994-2007 and 2007-19. Both earnings definitions show very similar patterns in growth over the three periods, though since 1994 employer costs have tended to grow more strongly than gross earnings. Both earnings definitions also have tended to grow more strongly at the lower end of the earnings distributions. This is consistent with the stronger growth we observe among women as can be seen in Figure 19.


Figure 15. Median real gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time

Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices. Breaks in the series in 2000 and 2011.






















Figure 16. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time



Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.



Figure 17. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings and total employer cost, over time

Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.



Figure 18. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.

Figure 19. Growth in gross earnings by earnings percentile, overall and sex, selected periods





Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60. Breaks in the data in 2000 and 2011.



Figure 20. Growth in gross earnings and employer costs by earnings percentile, selected periods




Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.

4.5 Self-employment
The share of (solo) self-employed has risen since the mid-1990s, in particular for men. An increasing share of workers are self-employed (Figure 21), with the increase due to the increase in so-called solo self-employed (self-employed without employees or a working family member). The rise in self-employment is stronger for men than for women (Figure 22). The rise is particularly strong for low-educated men. For women there is some rise in self-employment for higher-educated women. When we look at the share of self-employed across the earnings distribution, we see that the rise in the share of self-employed has been much stronger between 2007 and 2019 than between 1981 and 2007 (Figure 23). Although we see an increase in self- employment across the board, the increase seems slightly stronger at the lower end of the earnings distribution.



Figure 21. Share of employees and self-employed workers, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the EBB. Individuals age 25-60 years of age. 'Solo self-employed' are self-employed without employees, 'Other self-employed' includes self-employed with employees and family workers.


Figure 22. Share self-employed by sex and education, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the EBB. Individuals age 25-60 years of age.

Figure 23. Share self-employed by percentile of individual earnings, selected years


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Individuals 25-60 years of age.

5. Labour market institutions
The relevance of the minimum wage declined in the 1980s, as minimum wages were 'frozen', but since the mid-2000s the share of workers with a wage up to 120% of the minimum wage has been increasing. During the 1970s, the minimum wage increased at a faster pace than the average wage in collective labour agreements (Figure 24, left-hand panel). However, during the 1980s the minimum wage was 'frozen', whereas the average wage in collective labour agreements continued to increase. Since the 1980s, minimum wages have grown at a similar pace to the average wage in collective labour agreements (until recently, on 1 January 2023, minimum wages were increased by 10%). As a result of the minimum wage freeze, the number of
employees with earnings at the minimum wage level declined during the 1980s (Figure 24, right- hand panel). During the early 1990s this share rebounded somewhat, but has been more or less stable since the mid-1990s. However, the share of workers with a wage up to and including 120% of the minimum wage has been increasing since the mid-2000s.

Union membership among employees has been cut in half since the late 1970s, but the share of employees covered by a collective labour agreement is still close to 80%. The share of employees who are members of a union has declined from close to 40% in 1970 to below 20% in 2019 (Figure 25). The decline was particularly strong in the 1980s. However, the share of employees covered by a collective labour agreement was 80% in 1970, and was still close to 80%
in 2019. This is the result of extending the collective labour agreement to all employees in the same firm or sector.

The share of gross social insurance benefits has increased for the bottom quartile of the disposable income distribution, but declined for the other quartiles. As enrolment in various types of social insurance increased during the 1980s, gross social insurance benefits as a proportion of overall gross income increased, in particular for the bottom income quartile (Figure 26). Since then, benefits have largely followed the business cycle for the bottom income quartile.
This relation with the business cycle is much weaker for the other income quartiles, where the share of benefits in gross income has been declining since the 1980s.

Direct taxes have declined as a share of gross income over time. The share of direct taxes in gross income has declined since 1977 (Figure 27).

Disposable income as a share of gross income has been trending upward, indicating that effective average tax rates have declined, though the rise is less pronounced once we consider disposable income as a share of employer cost. Disposable income as a share of gross income has been increasing the most for the bottom income quartile (Figure 28). The increase is more moderate for the other income quartiles, in particular when we consider disposable income as a share of employer cost (Figure 29).

Figure 24. Bite of the minimum wage, over time: (left) minimum wages and collective wages (1974=100); (right) share of jobs just above the minimum wage
Notes: Data are taken from a special issue of Statistics Netherlands on the minimum wage (https://www.cbs.nl/nl- nl/nieuws/2019/08/vijftig-jaar-minimumloon) and Statline for recent data on the share of employees at or below 120% of the minimum wage. The left-hand panel shows an index of the (nominal) minimum wage and the average collectively agreed wage over time. CLA = collective labour agreement. The right-hand panel shows the share of jobs of employees of all ages at the minimum wage ('100%MW', with breaks in 1983, 1991, 1995, 1999, 2000 and 2006), the share of jobs of employees of all ages at or below 120% of the minimum wage ('<=120%MW') and the share of jobs of employees 25-60 years of age at or below 120% of the minimum wage ('<=120%MW, 25-60).

Figure 25. Union density and fraction of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements, over time

Notes: Data taken from the OECD. Union density is the share of employees who are members of a union. The collective contract coverage rate is the share of employees covered by a collective labour agreement (CLA), due to the extension of CLAs to the whole firm or sector.



Figure 26. Benefits as a proportion of overall income, by net household income quartile

Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Individuals 25-60 years of age.



Figure 27. Direct taxes as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Individuals 25-60 years of age. Direct taxes are defined here as the difference between gross income and disposable income.

Figure 28. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Individuals 25-60 years of age.



Figure 29. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income and employer social security contributions, by net household income quartile


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Individuals 25-60 years of age.

6. Household composition and incomes
6.1 Trends in household composition
The share of individuals who are married/cohabiting has been decreasing for lower- and intermediate-educated individuals, but has remained rather stable for higher-educated individuals. Overall, the share of individuals who are married or cohabiting (with or without children) has decreased from 80% in 1990 to close to 70% in 2020 (Figure 30). There is an important break in the EBB regarding position in the household, so we do not report outcomes for 2021 and 2022. The decrease in couples was the most pronounced for low-educated individuals; the share of singles among this group has almost doubled between 1990 and 2020. There is also some decrease in the share of couples for intermediate-educated individuals, but for
high-educated individuals there is almost no decrease.

For lower- and intermediate-educated women we see an increasing share of singles without children and lone parents; for lower- and intermediate educated men the increase is mostly in singles without children. An increasing share of individuals are either single without children or a lone parent (Figure 31). When we look by gender and education group (Figure 32), we see that for women the share of singles without children rises for all education levels, though less so for intermediate-educated women. For low- and intermediate-educated women we also see an increasing share of lone parents. We see a particularly strong increase in singles without children among low-educated men, and also some increase in this share for intermediate-
educated men. This also reflects that children of divorced parents are more likely to be registered and live with the mother than the father (more than 80% of lone parents are women). For high- educated men there is hardly an increase in the share who are single, as opposed to high- educated women, where this share is increasing.

Among men with relatively low earnings, the share who are in a couple has declined, and the share who have a working partner has increased less than among men with relatively high earnings. The share of men with relatively low earnings who are married or cohabiting has declined substantially (Figure 33). Also, among men with relatively low earnings, the share who have a working partner did not change much between 1981 and 2019, the net result of the general increase in female participation but a decrease in the share of low-earning men who have a female partner. For high-earning men, the share who are married/cohabiting has hardly changed, consistent with the results by level of education, while the share of high-earning men who have a working partner has increased quite a lot.

Both low- and high-earning women are less likely to be in a couple, and also less likely to have a working partner. For women, changes are less earnings-specific (Figure 33). Low-earning women are less likely to be married/cohabiting, but the same is true for high-earning women, with a drop in the share who are married/cohabiting in the order of 5-10 percentage points. Also when we look at the share who have a working partner, we see an across-the-board drop in this share, up to 10 percentage points.

Within couples there is an increase in assortative matching in terms of earnings. Within the group of male-female couples, there was hardly any assortative matching by earnings level between men and women in 1981 (Figure 34). This picture had changed considerably by 2019, when we observe a clear pattern of assortative matching on earnings for men and women.
Women (men) with relatively low (high) earnings are in couples with men (women) who have on average relatively low (high) earnings.

Figure 30. Share of individuals married/cohabiting, overall and by education, over time

Notes: Own calculations using the EBB. Sample is individuals aged 25-60.



Figure 31. Share of individuals by position in the household, over time

Notes: Own calculations using the EBB. Sample is individuals aged 25-60. 'Single, children' and 'couple, children' refer to dependent children only. Parents of adult children are categorised as 'other'. Before 1994 'adult child' refers only to adults living in a household whose head is their parent due to data limitations.



Figure 32. Share of individuals by position in the household, by sex and education, over time



100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%















Year

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%















Year



100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%


Year	Year


100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%


Year	Year

Notes: Own calculations using the EBB.

Figure 33. Share married/cohabiting and share with working partner, by sex and individual gross earnings percentile, selected years
Working: Married/cohabiting	Working: Has a working partner
 Non-working: Married/cohabiting	 Non-working: Has a working partner







Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is individuals aged 25-
60. Married/cohabitating also includes civil partnerships. The proportion with a working partner is conditional on being married/cohabiting.



Figure 34. Mean gross earnings percentile of partner/spouse by individual's gross earnings percentile, selected years

Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is individuals aged 25-
60. Married/cohabitating also includes civil partnerships.


6.2 Household earnings and disposable incomes among working households
After an initial decline in the 1980s, the share of households with at least one working adult has been slightly increasing. From the end of the 1970s to the early 1980s, the share of households with at least one working adult declined, in part related to the recession of the early 1980s (Figure 35). But since the early 1990s, the share of households with at least one working adult has increased somewhat, related to the increasing share of women that work.

Household earnings and disposable household income have steadily increased over the last 40 years, though not for households without an adult in work. Figure 36 shows that both gross household earnings and disposable household income have increased over time for working households. For non-working households, which have substantially lower disposable income than working households, disposable income has hardly changed over time. Working households dominate the observed trend for disposable income of all households.
Growth in real gross household earnings and growth in household disposable income have followed very similar patterns. Both the annualised growth in real gross household earnings and that in household disposable income for working households by percentile are shown in Figure 37. Patterns and levels of growth in gross household earnings and disposable income are quite similar to each other in the periods 1981-94 and 1994-2007. In 2007-19, growth in disposable income was somewhat higher than household earnings growth. Since 1994-2007, growth in both income definitions is quite stable over the income distribution, unlike the individual earnings growth (in particular, of women) shown in Figure 19.
The COVID-19 crisis has hardly affected the growth in household incomes. Indeed, since the impact on employment rates was minor and relatively short-lived, and earnings per worker were hardly affected, the COVID-19 crisis hardly impacted household incomes.

Figure 35. Share of individuals in a working household, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is individuals aged 25-
60. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work.



Figure 36. Median real gross household earnings and disposable household income among working households, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.



Figure 37. Annualised growth in real gross household earnings and household disposable income for working households, by percentile, selected years





Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Sample is individuals in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households
There has been some increase in inequality in real equivalised disposable income across households and the top income shares, and a strong rise in relative poverty. In Figure 38, we show the long-term trends in inequality in (standardised) disposable household income, the top 1% income share and the share of individuals who live in relative poverty. The Gini coefficient has increased by 9% (accounting for the breaks in the series in 2000 and 2011). At the lower end, we observe a substantial increase in relative poverty from 7% to 15% (+122%). The top 1% income share has increased by 12%. The peaks in this top income share in 2007 and 2014 are due to temporary cuts in the tax on dividends, which gave, for example, the high-earning self-employed an incentive to pay out dividends in those years.
Inequality in disposable household income has primarily increased at the lower end of the distribution. Building on the Gini coefficients shown in Figure 38, which suggest a slight increase in disposable household income inequality, we show the 90:10, 90:50 and 50:10 ratios in Figure
39. These measures show more clearly what has happened in the lower and upper parts of the distribution of disposable household income. We observe that the 90:10 and 50:10 ratios have increased somewhat over time. The 90:50 ratio is relatively stable over time. Taken together, this suggests that inequality has primarily increased at the lower end of the income distribution, which relates to the increasing poverty rates observed in Figure 38.



Figure 38. Gini, relative poverty and top 1% share of net household income for all households, over time



Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with less than 60% of contemporaneous median income before the deduction of housing costs. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Breaks in the series in 2000 and 2011.


Figure 39. Percentile ratios of disposable household incomes for all households, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Breaks in the series in 2000 and 2011.

7. Immigrants and natives
Inequality by migration background is an important topic in the Netherlands. Although the Netherlands is often considered to be a country where inequality is relatively low, there are substantial differences when it comes to gender (see the previous sections) and migration background (Jongen et al., 2019, 2020; Dagevos et al., 2020).
The issue is becoming increasingly relevant for Dutch society, as the share of migrants in the population is steadily increasing. Figure 40 gives the share of immigrants in the population aged 25-60. We see a steady increase in the share of immigrants in the population. Most of this growth has been in so-called non-Western immigrants (broadly speaking, immigrants from Africa, Latin America and Asia), see Dagevos et al. (2020). The main countries of origin for non-Western
immigrants are from T rkiye, Morocco, Surinam and the Antilles and Aruba.
The increase in the share of immigrants was more pronounced at the lower end of the income distribution, which has contributed to the increase in inequality at the bottom of the income distribution. Figure 41 shows the share of immigrants by disposable income percentile in 1994, 2007 and 2019. Although the share of immigrants has increased in all parts of the income distribution, the rise was the most pronounced at the bottom of the income distribution. This has contributed to the (moderate) increase in income inequality.
There is a persistent gap in relative poverty between immigrants and natives. Figure 42 shows that immigrants are about three times as likely to live in relative poverty as natives, and this factor has remained pretty constant over time.
The lower disposable income of immigrants relative to natives is driven by their lower education level, lower employment rate and lower earnings. Although the gap to natives in terms of education is smaller for women than for men, the gap in employment rates is bigger for women (Figure 43). Differences in hours per week are modest, and working immigrant women actually work more hours per week than native women. Overall, the gap to natives in earnings is
smaller for women than for men.



Figure 40. Share of immigrants in the population 25-60


Notes: Own calculations using the EBB. Share of (first generation) immigrants in the population aged 25-60. Break in the series in 2011.


Figure 41. Share of immigrants in population, by disposable income distribution over time


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19).

Figure 42. Share in relative poverty, immigrants and natives, 26-50 years of age, 1994-2019


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Breaks in the series in 2000 and 2011.


Figure 43. Outcomes immigrants relative to natives, ages 25-60, 1996-2019


Notes: Own calculations using the EBB, the IPO (1996 and 2007) and the integral income files (2019). Individuals aged 25-
60. Natives are normalised to 1. Earnings and incomes are ratios of medians. Earnings are only of those that work.

8. References
Bettendorf, L., Jongen, E. and Muller, P., 2015. Childcare subsidies and labour supply - Evidence from a large Dutch reform. Labour Economics, 36, 112-23.
Bosch, N. and van der Klaauw, B., 2012. Analyzing female labor supply - Evidence from a Dutch tax reform. Labour Economics, 1(3), 271-80.
Caminada, K., Jongen, E., Bos, W., van den Brakel, M. and Otten, F., 2021. Inkomen Verdeeld: Trends 1977-2019 (in Dutch). Statistics Netherlands/Leiden University, Heerlen/Leiden. [link]
CPB, 2018. Arbeidsparticipatie, CPB Notitie. Centraal Planbureau (in Dutch). https://www.cpb.nl/sites/default/files/omnidownload/CPB-Notitie-20dec2018- Arbeidsparticipatie.pdf
CPB, 2021. Dalende arbeidsparticipatie van jonge mannen - een vooronderzoek, CPB Notitie, Centraal Planbureau (in Dutch). https://www.cpb.nl/sites/default/files/omnidownload/CPB- Notitie-Dalende-arbeidsparticipatie-van-jonge-mannen-een-vooronderzoek.pdf
Dagevos, J., Jongen, E. and Muns, S., 2020. Promising policies for integration on the labour market. Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis and Netherlands Institute for Social Research. https://www.cpb.nl/sites/default/files/omnidownload/English_Summary_Promising_policies_for_i ntegration_on_the_labour_market.pdf
De Boer, H.-W. and Jongen, E., 2020. Analysing tax-benefit reforms in the Netherlands using structural models and natural experiments. IZA Discussion Paper 12892. https://docs.iza.org/dp12892.pdf
Euwals, R., van Vuuren, D. and Wolthoff, R., 2010. Early retirement behaviour in the Netherlands: evidence from a policy reform. De Economist, 158, 209-36.
Euwals, R., Knoef, M. and van Vuuren, D., 2011. The trend in female labour force participation: What can be expected for the future? Empirical Economics, 40, 729-53.
Jongen, E., Bolhaar, J., Elk, R. van, Koot, P. and van Vuuren, D., 2019. Inkomensongelijkheid naar migratieachtergrond. CPB Policy Brief 2019/06 (in Dutch). https://www.cpb.nl/sites/default/files/omnidownload/cpb-policy-brief-2019-06- inkomensongelijkheid-naar-migratieachtergrond_0.pdf
Jongen, E., Muns, S. , Thijs, C., de Boer, H.-W., Dagevos, J., Dillingh, R., Huijnk, W., Karpinska, K. Klaver, J., Schaper, J., de Wilde, T. and Zulkarnian, A., 2020. Kansrijk integratiebeleid op de arbeidsmarkt. Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis and Netherlands Institute for Social Research.

https://www.cpb.nl/sites/default/files/omnidownload/Kansrijk_integratiebeleid_op_de_arbeidsm arkt2.pdf
Jongen, E., Ebregt, J. and Verstegen, L., 2021. IZA COVID-19 crisis response monitoring, Netherlands (December 2021). IZA.
https://www.iza.org/wc/files/downloads/iza  crisismonitor_countryreport_nl_202112.pdf
Koning, P. and Lindeboom, M., 2015. The rise and fall of disability insurance enrollment in the Netherlands, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2), 151-72.
Knoef, M., Been, J., Caminada, K., Goudswaard, K. and Rhuggenaath, J., 2017. De toereikendheid van pensioenopbouw na de crisis en pensioenhervormingen, Netspar Design Paper 68. https://www.netspar.nl/assets/uploads/Netspar-Design-Paper-68-WEB.pdf
Lindeboom, M. and Montizaan, R., 2020. Pension reform: Disentangling retirement and savings responses, Journal of Public Economics, 192(3), 104297.
OECD, 2023. Labour Force Statistics. Paris: OECD. https://www.oecd.org/sdd/labour-stats
Rabat , S., Jongen, E. and Atav, T., 2023. Increasing the retirement age: policy effects and underlying mechanisms, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming. https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pol.20210101
Statistics Netherlands and Social Cultural Office, 2020. Emancipatiemonitor 2020, Statistics Netherlands (in Dutch). https://www.cbs.nl/nl-nl/publicatie/2020/50/emancipatiemonitor-2020

9. Appendix: additional charts
Figure 44. Annualised growth in real wages by wages percentile, overall and by sex, selected periods




Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19).


Figure 45. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time


Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19). Breaks in the series in 2000 and 2011.



Figure 46. Annualised growth in gross earnings by earnings percentile, overall and sex, selected periods





Notes: Own calculations using the IPO (1977-2011) and the integral income files (2011-19).







































































































































































lnstitute for Fiscal Studies

Country Studies: Inequalities in Europe and North America
A parallel study to the IFS Deaton Review


Richard Blundell Jonathan Cribb Tom Wernham Xiaowei Xu



Inequality in the UK: 1968-2021


















Inequality in the UK: 1968-2021
Richard Blundell, Jonathan Cribb, Tom Wernham and Xiaowei Xu1
Institute for Fiscal Studies
Contents
Inequality in the UK: 1968-2021	1
1. Executive summary	2
Employment, wages, hours and individual earnings	2
Labour market institutions	2
Household incomes	3
2. Institutional background	4
3. Notes on measurement and definitions	6
4. Individual employment and earnings	8
4.1 Trends in employment	8
4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)	12
4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)	17
4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self- employed)	20
4.5 Self-employment	25
5. Labour market institutions	28
5.1 Minimum wage and unions	28
5.2 The effects of taxes and state benefits across the income distribution	29
6. Household incomes	32
6.1 Trends in household composition	32
6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households	37
6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households	41
7. Immigration	44
8. References	47
9. Data appendix	48
10. Appendix: additional charts	50





1 This work is supported by the framework of the Trans-Atlantic Platform (http://www.transatlanticplatform.com/) by the French National Research Agency, the United States' National Science Foundation, the United Kingdom's Economic and Social Research Council, Canada's Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, the Academy of Finland and Germany's Federal Ministry of Education and Research. The UK part of this grant, funded by the ESRC, is grant number ES/X000656/1. This is a parallel project to the IFS Deaton Review, which is funded by the Nuffield Foundation. Co-funding from the Economic Co-funding from the ESRC-funded Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy at IFS (grant number ES/T014334/1) is also gratefully acknowledged.
(c) Institute for Fiscal Studies	1

1. Executive summary
Employment, wages, hours and individual earnings
The UK has seen a sustained rise in employment rates among prime working-age (25-60-year- old) women over the last four decades, from 54% in 1968 to 78% in 2019. The employment rate for men, which fell over the 1970s and 1980s as the economy deindustrialised, has also been on the rise over the past decade, approaching 90% in 2019, but is still slightly below the levels seen in the early 1970s. Increases in the compulsory school leaving age and the expansion of higher education have led to a large rise in educational attainment for both men and women. In 2021, 39% of prime working-aged people had high levels of education (ISCED 6-8), and just 4% had low levels of education (ISCED 0-2).
Median real hourly wages for employees rose by around 2.3% a year on average between 1968 and 2007 but stagnated after the Great Recession. This stagnation is seen across all education groups, and cannot be explained by rising employment rates and selection into employment (Blundell et al. 2018). Median wages exceeded pre-2008 levels for the first time in 2020.
Inequality in hourly wages increased substantially in the 1980s. Since then, wage inequality across most of the distribution has stabilised, as measured by the 90:10 ratio (the Gini coefficient continued to rise due to rising wages at the top, albeit at a much slower rate than in the 1980s). The relative stability of overall wage inequality masks a sustained rise in male wage inequality up until the Great Recession: the 90:10 ratio of male wages rose from 2.8 in 1980 to 3.6 in 1994 and
3.8 in 2007. This was offset by women's wages catching up with men's wages on average, as well as some fall in wage inequality among women. Since the Great Recession, and in particular since 2016, wage inequality has fallen for both men and women in part as a result of large increases in the minimum wage. Average hours worked among employees have increased for women, and fallen gradually for men, since the mid-1990s. The increase in hours worked for women was seen across the wage distribution. For men, the fall in hours worked was concentrated among low- wage, low-educated men, up until the Great Recession.
Combining trends in hourly wages and hours worked, inequality in individual earnings has been relatively stable over the last 25 years. But inequality in male earnings rose between 1980 and the Great Recession, driven by rising wage inequality at the top and rising hours inequality at the bottom. This trend appears to have stopped in the last decade, as growth in the minimum wage outstripped wage growth further up the distribution, and hours worked stopped falling disproportionately for low-wage men. Further, the rise in employment rates means that earnings inequality across all prime working-aged people, including those out of work (with zero earnings), has fallen over the past decade.

Labour market institutions
There has been a dramatic decline in collective bargaining in the UK, with union density falling from its peak of 52% in 1980 to 24% in 2019. A minimum wage was introduced in 1999 and its bite has increased over time, especially since 2016. The minimum wage does not cover self-employed workers, and self-employment has become much more prevalent over the last four decades, especially among those on low hourly wages. The share of prime working-aged people who are self-employed rose from 6% in 1980 to 9% in 1990 and 10% in 2019. In recent years (when data are available), there has been a rise in 'solo self-employment' and a fall in the share of people who are self-employed with employees. The UK social security system is unusual by European standards in having virtually no contributory component. Instead, entitlement to most benefits is means-tested and depends on financial need (e.g., due to having a combination of low income, high housing costs, and a number of children) rather than previous earnings. As such, replacement rates vary widely depending on previous pay and circumstances, and there is no distinction between short-term and long-term replacement rates. There have been large



changes to the welfare system in the UK, including a large expansion of state benefits in the late 1990s and early 2000s and retrenchment in their generosity after 2011.

Household incomes
Two key factors affect the way in which inequality in individual earnings translates into inequality in household incomes: household structures and the tax and benefit system. There has been a rise in assortative matching in marriage and partnership in the UK over the past four decades. First, the relationship between individual earnings and the likelihood of being in a couple is now more strongly positive than before. The share of prime working-aged people who are single has increased much more in lower-educated groups. Second, high-earning individuals are now more likely to have a partner who works than before. In 1968, men around the 95th percentile of earnings were 10 percentage points less likely to have a working partner than those in the 15th percentile of earnings (though they were more likely to have a partner at all), while in 2019 they were 8 percentage points more likely. Third, for couples in which both partners are in paid work, the positive correlation between partners' earnings is now stronger than before. The rise in assortative matching means that the catch-up of women with men over the last four decades has largely reduced earnings inequality within, rather than across, households. Coupled with the rise in male earnings inequality, which remains the largest source of household earnings, the result is that inequality in earnings among working households rose up until the Great Recession, especially in the 1980s.
The tax and benefit system somewhat dampened the rise in household earnings inequality in the 1980s, but the effect was far from complete: between 1980 and 1994, disposable household incomes among working households rose by an average of 3.7% a year at the 95th percentile of household incomes, compared to just 0.9% at the 5th percentile (the corresponding figures for household earnings were -1.7% and 4.2%, respectively). Further, the fall in male employment rates over this period meant that more people lived in workless households, pushing up household earnings inequality across all households (including workless households). As result, inequality in disposable household incomes rose sharply in the 1980s: the Gini coefficient rose from 0.26 in 1980 to 0.33 in 1994, and the 90:10 ratio rose from 3.2 to 4.1. In contrast, the expansion of state benefits in the late 1990s and early 2000s entirely offset the rise in earnings inequality among working households in the decade before the Great Recession. State transfers propped up incomes at the bottom, so that the growth in disposable household incomes between 1994 and 2007 was similar across the income distribution (around 2.3% a year on average).
Further, the rise in employment rates from the mid-1990s meant that more households had someone in work, reducing earnings inequality across all households. Taken together, inequality in disposable household incomes across all households was relatively stable between the mid- 1990s and the Great Recession.
Inequality in disposable household incomes has also been stable since the Great Recession (since 2007), offsetting slightly increasing household earnings inequality, but the underlying drivers have been very different. Household earnings growth has been broadly progressive, especially since 2016, as wage inequality fell and trends in male hours also worked to reduce earnings inequality. However, a series of cuts to working-age benefits after 2011 meant that growth in disposable household incomes at the bottom of the distribution was lower than growth in household earnings. While the tax and benefit system offset rising earnings inequality in the decade leading up to the Great Recession, fiscal austerity pushed in the opposite direction in the last decade, offsetting declines in household earnings inequality.
Immigration has changed the composition of the UK population in recent decades. The fraction of the working-age population that was born abroad rose from 9% in 1993 to 15% in 2008 to 21% in 2021. Immigrants in 2008 were particularly clustered towards the bottom, and top, of the income distribution, but by 2019 this had changed and they were much more evenly spread across the population. On average, immigrants have very high education levels and similar labour market outcomes to UK born people, with the exception of lower levels of female employment.

2. Institutional background

The UK has a population of 67 million people, with a population and total GDP similar to France. Its economy is dominated by services, with comparative advantages in finance, business services, higher education, and pharmaceuticals among other industries. London and southern England are particularly prosperous in comparison to poorer parts of the country such as northern England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Institutionally, the UK is a highly centralised country, though to different degrees; Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have their own devolved assemblies/parliaments with powers over state education and health in particular.

The UK has a sizeable working-age benefits system providing support for those who are unemployed, those on low incomes, those with children, and those with sickness and disability. Until 2016, social security was organised by the UK central government for Great Britain (England, Scotland and Wales), with a separate system for Northern Ireland, though since then there has been devolution of some social security to Scotland. Spending on working-age benefits was equivalent to around 4.5% of national income just before COVID.2 Most state benefits are not taxable (with exceptions including contribution-based benefits for the unemployed, and the state pension).

The UK has limited unemployment benefits compared to other OECD countries. Benefits for the unemployed are not based on previous earnings and are tied to undertaking job search. They are administered either through the means-tested benefits system, or through flat-rate contributions-based support for those who do not qualify for means-tested support, which is time-limited and requires claimants to have been working and paying National Insurance (a payroll tax) previously.

There is therefore significant variability in 'earnings replacement rates' upon becoming unemployed, depending on factors affecting eligibility for means-tested benefits, including housing (renters receive more), family size and health status. But a single childless worker on average earnings will have just 13% of their income replaced by benefits if they fall out of work.3 Real levels of unemployment benefits for families without children have been broadly unchanged for decades. By contrast, support for families with children has roughly doubled since 1975.

Households with people in paid work, but on low incomes, are also eligible for state financial support, which again varies considerably by factors such as those listed above. The benefits system has become more focused on in-work families in recent decades.4 Households with children receive greater state financial support than those without. One component of this, Child Benefit, is available to around three-quarters of families with children, and before 2013 was universally available.5 Benefits are also available to individuals who are disabled or long-term sick. The system is complicated, and includes means-tested support, flat-rate support for those who fail the means test but have previously worked and paid National Insurance contributions, and support for the costs incurred because of disability, which is available regardless of income or work status. Starting in the early 2010s, most - but not all - of the benefits paid to low-income families have been integrated into one single benefit called Universal Credit.

The UK has a state pension system which provides pension benefits from claiming until death. It is claimable from the state pension age, which was 60 for women until 2010 and 65 for men until 2018. Increases to this age for men and women mean it is now claimable from age 66, rising to 67 by 2028. The state pension system increasingly focuses on providing a flat-rate state pension for

2 https://ifs.org.uk/inequality/benefits-and-tax-credits/
3 https://ifs.org.uk/books/temporary-benefit-increases-beyond-2020-21
4 https://ifs.org.uk/inequality/benefits-and-tax-credits/
5  https://ifs.org.uk/publications/reforms-roll-outs-and-freezes-tax-and-benefit-system



all people with 35 qualifying years. Qualifying years are years in which people either: earn above a low threshold (currently around  6,000); are out of work looking after young children; or are in receipt of certain state benefits).6 There is also a large system of private pensions which supplement state pensions for many. A full new state pension (available to someone with 35 or more qualifying years) for a newly retired person is worth 29% of median full-time earnings.
Since 2012, most employees are automatically enrolled into private pensions schemes, generally defined benefit schemes in the public sector and generally defined contribution schemes in the private sector.

Healthcare in the UK is publicly provided by the National Health Service (NHS), run by central government and the national governments of Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. This is largely free at the point of use and funded by general taxation, with limited co-payments for dental care and prescription medicine. A private healthcare system and private health insurance are available alongside the NHS, but it is impossible to opt out of contributing to the public system through taxation.

Education for children is also largely provided and funded by the state, and is free for all children aged 4 to 18. Again, a private system funded by fees does exist which is provides for a small minority of students, but it is not possible to opt out of paying for the state system. State-funded schools are controlled by a mixture of local government, not-for-profit trusts, and religious organisations. In most areas of the UK (except for Northern Ireland and some counties in England) there is no widespread academic selection for entry into secondary school (at age 11), but there is frequently academic selection into the final two years of secondary education.
Increasingly state-funded school are 'academies' which are not-for-profit trusts, outside the direct control of local government (though local government generally coordinates primary and secondary school applications).

University entrance at age 18 is very common, with a high number of prestigious universities in the UK as well as many less well-known institutions. Universities are not part of the public sector, but there are regulated (maximum) fees for undergraduates, along with an income-based student loan repayment system, which has seen a large number of changes in the last two decades. The UK has a less well-developed system of vocational education through 'further education colleges' and through apprenticeships, although reform to the latter has made it a more popular route for the most intensive ('degree-level') apprenticeships, growing fast from a very low base.

The main taxes on personal incomes are income tax (which taxes individual income from all sources, except capital gains and benefits), and National Insurance (payable by employees and their employers on their earnings, as well as by self-employed people). Scotland can, and does, set different income tax rates. Income taxes for high earners fell dramatically during the 1980s, though there have been rises in marginal and average tax rates for higher earners since 2010, with additional complications to the system. The main taxes on consumption are value-added tax (VAT), as well as various excise duties (such as fuel and alcohol duties). The other main personal tax is council tax, which is based on property value and is paid to local rather than national government. Income tax and National Insurance account for almost half of tax revenues, and together with VAT for around two-thirds. Local taxes constitute only a small proportion of overall tax revenue. The income tax system is progressive, while consumption taxes are broadly distributionally neutral. Local taxes (which are linked to property values) are regressive, but the personal tax system as a whole remains progressive.7







6 For more details, see https://www.gov.uk/new-state-pension
7  https://ifs.org.uk/news/tax-system-reduces-inequality-benefits-do-most-heavy-lifting

3. Notes on measurement and definitions
Unit of analysis and sample:

? The sample is individuals aged between 25 and 60 inclusive, except where otherwise indicated. For figures on wages and earnings, the sample is further restricted to individuals (or households where applicable) with strictly positive wages or earnings, respectively. There are no further restrictions for the household income figures.

? Individuals are the unit of analysis throughout. For example, for equivalised household income, each individual is allocated their respective equivalised household income, so that income is counted as many times as there are individuals aged 25-60 in the household.

? In the figure where we winsorise, we allocate all observations above the 99th percentile the amount equal to the 99th percentile. Otherwise, distributions are not trimmed.

Outcome definitions:
? Employment rate: the fraction of the population that is employed according to self- reported employment status.

? Earnings: gross annual real individual earnings (includes self-employed), among those who are employed and have strictly positive real earnings.

o If an employee has multiple jobs, earnings from all jobs are summed together.

o Most figures include employee taxes but not employer taxes, pension contributions or other contributions (e.g. health insurance). A few figures explicitly compare trends in gross earnings with and without employer taxes.

o The period to which earnings data refer will vary across countries. In the UK, the data are obtained as follows:

* Information on employee earnings is obtained by asking respondents the amount they were paid on the pay date closest to the interview. These (plus bonuses received over the last 12 months) are converted into nominal weekly amounts which we 'mechanically' annualise by multiplying by 365/52.

* Self-employed respondents are asked questions on their most recent business accounts as submitted to HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) - dates of the accounts, profit or loss figures, tax and National Insurance amounts. They are then asked if they draw money from their business accounts for non-business purposes, such as for payments to themselves, personal spending, paying domestic bills etc. and how much this is per month on average. They are also asked if they receive other income from their business for personal use (e.g., cash in hand), and how much this is per month on average.

* Those who do not keep annual business accounts and do not draw money for non-business purposes are asked for their income after paying for materials, equipment, goods etc. and whether they make tax and National Insurance payments on this amount.

* Our data (the Family Resource Survey (FRS)) do not fully capture information on all types of income in kind accurately - for example, benefits of vehicles, computers and mobile phones purchased by the business that are also for



personal use. And these benefits are likely to be more important for the self- employed than for employees. Therefore, the FRS earnings measures are likely to underestimate the true monetary and other benefits of self-employment.
However, it is very difficult to quantify this.

o Nominal earnings are converted into real terms in calendar year 2019 or financial year 2019-20 prices, using the Consumer Prices Index (CPI).

? Hours of work: usual/ typical paid hours worked per week, among those who are employed and have strictly positive real earnings. Excludes self-employed workers.

? Wages: individual real gross hourly wages (weekly gross employee earnings divided by weekly hours worked as defined above). Excludes self-employed workers. We convert nominal wages into real terms in calendar year 2019 or financial year 2019-20 prices, using the CPI.

? Disposable household income (household equivalised income after deducting taxes and adding benefits and tax credits):

o The main measure of household income used in this report is income after direct taxes and transfers have been deducted from or added to household income.

o Income includes: usual net earnings from employment, profit or loss from self- employment, state support (all benefits and tax credits), income from occupational and private pensions, investment income, maintenance payments, income from educational grants and scholarships, cash value of forms of income in kind (such as free school meals).

o Income is net of: income tax payment, National Insurance contributions, local (council) tax, contributions to occupational pensions schemes, all maintenance and child support payments, parental contributions to students living away from home, student loan repayments.

o Incomes are equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale, normalised to a single individual.

Splits:
? Sex: female, male

? Education: We split education levels into three groups, based on age on leaving education, which approximately map onto International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) groups as follows:

Age on leaving education
ISCED
Group
15 or younger
16-19 inclusive
20 or older
ISCED 0-2
ISECD 3-5
ISCED 6-8
Low Medium
High
? Household type: Single without dependent children; single with dependent children; couples without dependent children; couples with dependent children; adult child; other. Parents of adult children go in the 'other' category. A dependent child is a child aged 0-17.

4. Individual employment and earnings
This section looks at trends in individual employment and earnings. With respect to earnings, we first look separately at hourly wages and hours worked, before bringing them together in a set of charts on earnings inequality. Due to a lack of reliable data on hours worked for the self- employed in the UK, we restrict the analysis of wages and hours to employees, but include both employees and the self-employed in the analysis on total earnings.

4.1 Trends in employment
Figure 1 shows that since 1968, the UK has seen a steady and sustained rise in the employment rate for prime working-age women (aged 25-60), with particularly fast growth over the 1970s and 1980s. By 2019, the female employment rate stood at 77%. There has also been fast growth in employment for older women (aged 61-74) since the mid-1990s, which in recent years in part reflects increases to the state pension age.

For prime working-age men, the employment rate has also been rising gradually over the last decade, following a period of stability in the 1990s and early 2000s, and decline during the deindustrialisation of the 1970s, 1980s and early 1990s. But at 88% in 2019, it was still below levels seen in the 1970s. For older men, the trend was similar, with an even more drastic decline in the 1970s and 1980s.Employment rates among young people (aged 16-24) have declined for both men and women since the 1968, due to increases in the school leaving age and an expansion of higher education. Since the pandemic, there have been falls in employment rates of most of the groups shown in Figure 1, particularly of younger adults who have remained in formal education in greater numbers, thereby delaying their entry to the labour market.



Figure 1. Employment rates by age and sex, over time
Male, 16-24	Male, 25-60	Male, 61-74
Female, 16-24	Female, 25-60	Female, 61-74
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


Year
Figure 2 shows that the fall in male employment rates since the late 1970s was largest at young and older ages. By contrast, for men in their 30s and 40s employment rates in 2019 were fairly similar to 1977. Employment rates for women in their 20s and 30s (their prime childbearing years) rose steadily over the decades, so that in 2019 women were as likely to be employed at these ages as in their 40s. Between 2007 and 2019, female employment at older ages rose sharply as result of gradual increases to the female state pension age.
Figure 2. Employment rates over life cycle by sex, selected years




100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Female


100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Male



Age	Age

We now focus on individuals in their prime working years (aged 25 to 60). Since the 1970s, there has been a significant expansion of education in the UK. The school leaving age was raised to 16 in 1972, and children were required to remain in some form of education or training until 17 from 2013 and 18 from 2015. There has also been a significant expansion of higher education over a long period. As a consequence of this, educational attainment has increased significantly, as shown in Figure 3, with 36% of people having a degree or higher as of 2019 (ISCED 6-8), up from

15% in 1994 and 9% in 1978. These trends have been very similar for both men and women (Figure 4), explaining the fall in employment rates for both sexes at younger ages seen above. The number with little or no education has declined drastically over the same period, and stood at only 5% in 2019.
Figure 3. Educational attainment over time



100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Low Ed.	Medium Ed.	High Ed.




Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Figure 4. Educational attainment by sex, over time
Male: Low Ed.	Male: Medium Ed.	Male: High Ed.
Female: Low Ed.	Female: Medium Ed.	Female: High Ed.
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.

Figure 5 shows how trends in employment have differed by educational background. Employment has risen for those with mid-level education and degree qualifications since the mid-1990s, and was similar to its 1978 level in 2019, whereas it decreased for those with low-level or no qualifications (which is increasingly negatively selected). Falls in employment during the



pandemic were particularly concentrated among people with degree-level education (see Blundell et al. 2022 for more details).
The trends differ somewhat by sex, as seen in Figure 6. Male employment rates have decreased for every education group since 1978, albeit from very high levels, and have been fairly flat since the mid-1990s, while female employment rates have risen gradually over time in all but the lowest education group.
Figure 5. Employment rates by education, over time
Low Ed.	Medium Ed.	High Ed.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.

Figure 6. Employment rates by sex and education, over time
Male: Low Ed.	Male: Medium Ed.	Male: High Ed. Female: Low Ed.	Female: Medium Ed.	Female: High Ed.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.

Figure 7 shows the large variation in the unemployment rate over time, since the early 1990s, split into whether it was long-term (over 12 months) or short-term (up to and including 12 months). The unemployment rate spiked in the deep 1980s recession, and during the milder (in terms of fall in GDP) early 1990s recession. It then fell considerably during the late 1990s and early 2000s,

before rising substantially in the Great Recession. As the UK recovered from the Great Recession, unemployment fell rapidly and at under 3% in 2019 was low by historical standards. The COVID-19 pandemic created a short spike in unemployment, but which was very low compared to the scale of economic disruption (see Cribb and Johnson 2023). Since 2000, roughly a third of unemployed workers were long-term unemployed, defined as having been unemployed for more than a year. This is down from around half of unemployed workers in the mid-1990s.

Figure 7. Unemployment rate by duration of unemployment over time
 Total  Short-term  Long-term
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Unemployment rate is calculated as the fraction of labour force aged 25-60, split between short-term (up to 1 year) and long-term (over 1 year) duration of unemployment.
Source: Authors' calculations using the Labour Force Survey, 1975 to 2020.

4.2 Trends in hourly wages (employees only)
Real median hourly wages rose steadily between 1968 and 2007, by almost 2.5 times in total, equivalent to annualised real growth of 2.3% per year. However, the Great Recession caused a significant drop in real wages, which had not been fully reversed by 2019 despite some recovery in the years before the pandemic. By 2021 median wages had just surpassed 2007 levels. Figures 8 and 9 show that these trends have been similar for males and females, and across education groups, though the drop in wages for those with university qualifications was particularly pronounced, and hourly wages for this group were barely higher than in the mid-1990s by 2019.



Figure 8. Median real hourly wage among employees, overall and by sex, over time
Male	Female	All
25

20

15

10

5

0


Year


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive wages. Wages are in 2019-20 prices.
Figure 9. Median real hourly wage among employees, by sex and education, over time
-
Male: Low Ed.	Male: Medium Ed.	Male: High Ed.
Female: Low Ed.	Female: Medium Ed.	Female: High Ed.
25


20


15


10


5


0


Year



Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive wages. Wages are in 2019-20 prices.
Figure 10 shows median wages over the life cycle by sex and education, for different time periods. Those with lower levels of education see a flatter wage profile over the life cycle, with men with little to no education (ISCED 0-2) and women with low to middle levels of education (ISCED 0-2

and 3-5) seeing virtually no wage growth over their working lives. For those with degrees (ISCED 6-8), men and women have the same median wage at age 25, but the gender wage gap gradually opens up between the ages of 25 and 35.
Figure 10. Median real hourly wage among employees over life cycle, by sex and education
Male	Female
1978-79 to 1982-83

Low Ed.
25
20
15
10
5
0

Medium Ed.
25	25
20	20
15	15
10	10
5	5
0	0

High Ed.





Age


Low Ed.
25
20
15
10
5
0

Age
1992-93 to 1996-97
Medium Ed.
25	25
20	20
15	15
10	10
5	5
0	0

Age


High Ed.





Age

Low Ed.
25
20
15
10
5
0

Age
2015-16 to 2019-20
Medium Ed.
25	25
20	20
15	15
10	10
5	5
0	0

Age

High Ed.





Age

Age

Age



Note: Sample is individuals with strictly positive wages. Wages are shown in 2019 constant-wage terms. Five-year smoothing across ages has been applied. In earlier years, higher ages have been excluded for the ISCED 6-8 group due to small sample sizes.
Figures 11 and 12 plot trends in wage inequality using the Gini coefficient, the 90:10 ratio and the 50:10 ratio. Wage inequality fell in the late 1960s to early 1970s and rose sharply from the late 1970s to the early 1990s. Since then, wage inequality has stabilised. Wage inequality across most of the distribution (as captured by the 90:10 ratio) has been falling over the last two decades, going back to its 1980 level by 2020, though inequality at the very top kept rising into the 2010s. The more recent fall in wage inequality, seen in 90:10 and 50:10 ratios in Figure 12 in particular, captures the rise in wages for low earners caused by substantial rises in the minimum wage.

The stability of overall wage inequality since the 1990s masks a sharp rise in male wage inequality and a fall in women's wage inequality, as well as women's wages catching up with men's wages. Between 1992 and 2020, the Gini in male wages rose from 0.28 to 0.31, while the Gini in female wages fell from 0.28 to 0.27.

Figure 11. Gini coefficient of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time
All	Male	Female
0.36
0.34
0.32
0.30
0.28
0.26
0.24
0.22
0.20


Year

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive hourly wages. Trimmed at the top and bottom 1% of the gender-specific hourly wage distribution.

Figure 12. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time
All: 90:10 ratio	Male: 90:10 ratio	Female: 90:10 ratio
All: 50:10 ratio	Male: 50:10 ratio	Female: 50:10 ratio

4.5	3.5


4.0	3.0


3.5	2.5


3.0	2.0


2.5	1.5


2.0	1.0


Year


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive hourly wages.
Figure 13 looks in more detail at changes in hourly wages across the wage distribution. The period between 1968 and 1980 was one of high and relatively even wage growth, with wages growing by nearly 3% a year for men and 4% for women across most of the distribution. Wage inequality increased sharply between 1980 and 1994, with wages growing at around three times (men) or twice (women) as quickly at the top as at the bottom of the wage distribution. Between 1994 and 2007, wage inequality fell for women and increased for men, driven by the top of the wage distribution (above the 70th percentile). In the period since the Great Recession (2007-19), wages stagnated or fell across most of the distribution, with the bottom of the distribution doing better than the rest. This reflects a series of increases in the minimum wage, especially since 2016.



Figure 13. Annualised growth in hourly wages among employees by wage percentile, overall and by sex, selected periods


5

4

3

2

1

0



5

4

3

2

1

0

Male	Female












Percentile
Male	Female


5

4

3

2

1

0



4

3

2

1

0

-1

Male	Female



Percentile

Male	Female



Percentile	Percentile


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60 with strictly positive hourly wages.

4.3 Trends in hours worked (employees only)
Figure 14 shows that average hours worked among employees have increased for women, and fallen for men, since the mid-1990s. For men, the fall in hours worked was concentrated among those with no or low levels of education (Figure 15), up until around 2010. Belfield et al. (2017) suggest that an important change for lower-educated and lower-paid men over this period was a larger proportion of them working part-time.

Figure 14. Mean hours worked among employees, overall and by sex, over time
Male	Female	All
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0


Year
Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60. Hours have been top-coded to 97 hours per week.

Figure 15. Mean hours worked among employees, by sex and education, over time
Male: Low Ed.	Male: Medium Ed.	Male: High Ed. Female: Low Ed.	Female: Medium Ed.	Female: High Ed.
50

45

40

35

30

25

20


Year


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60. Hours have been top-coded to 97 hours per week.
Figure 16 shows that average hours worked for women increased across the wage distribution, with larger increases towards the bottom of the distribution. For men, the fall was concentrated among those on low wages: between the mid-1990s and the Great Recession, hours worked fell for low-waged men and increased for high-waged men. Since the Great Recession, male hours have fallen across most of the wage distribution, though still more strongly towards the bottom.



Figure 16. Annualised growth in mean hours worked among employees by hourly wage ventile, overall and by sex, selected years
Male	Female
2.0

1.0

0.0

-1.0

-2.0

-3.0


-4.0

-

2.0



Hourly wage ventile

Male	Female


1.0

0.0

-1.0

-2.0

-3.0
Hourly wage ventile


2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
-3.0

Male	Female






2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
-3.0

Hourly wage ventile
Male	Female
















Hourly wage ventile


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60. Hours have been top-coded to 97 hours per week.


4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work (employees and self-employed)
We now turn to trends in individual earnings, which reflect the combination of trends in hours worked and hourly wages. Before examining inequality statistics, Figure 17 shows trends in median earnings, which are mainly driven by median wage changes - median hours have been comparatively stable over time. The figure shows that median earnings increased for men and women from 1968 until the Great Recession, which led to a lasting fall from which men have still not recovered, and women have only just recovered. Figure 18 shows that the recovery in earnings from the Great Recession has been particularly weak for those low level qualifications (ISCED 0-2), and also weaker for those with university qualifications (ISCED 6-8), though trends by education could be affected by selection (given the increase in educational attainment over this period).



Figure 17. Median real gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time
Male	Female	All
35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


Year

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019-20 prices.

Figure 18. Median real gross individual earnings, by sex and education, over time
Male: Low Ed.	Male: Medium Ed.	Male: High Ed. Female: Low Ed.	Female: Medium Ed.	Female: High Ed.
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0


Year



Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings. Gross earnings are in 2019-20 prices.

Figure 19 shows that overall earnings inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient has been broadly stable over the last three of decades, having risen in the 1980s. and stood at 0.36 in 2019. This is driven by a moderate decline in female earnings inequality, and a reduction in inequality between males and female earnings, offsetting a rise in male earnings inequality which began in the late 1970s and lasted until the Great Recession. As shown above, this rise in male earnings inequality was driven by rising wage inequality at the top and rising hours inequality at the

bottom. It is also notable that since the mid-2000s, male earnings inequality has been greater than female earnings inequality. The particular spikes in the data are caused by some very high observations in the data which are not trimmed out, in order to be consistent with other countries' reports. A slowing of the decline in hours worked at the bottom of the wage distribution, combined with higher growth in hourly wages driven by the minimum wage, has meant that the rise in male earnings inequality has stopped in the last decade.

Figure 19. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time



0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15

All	Male	Female


Year
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings.

Figure 20 shows how the Gini coefficient for earnings differs when they are considered on an 'employer cost' basis, including employer National Insurance contributions, to better reflect the cost to employers of employing an individual. Trends have been very similar over time, with inequality in employer costs very slightly higher since the 1990s. This similarity between the two series suggests that, for the UK, were we to focus on earnings including employer taxes, the trends in inequality would be very similar.



















Figure 20. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings and total employer cost, over time





0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15

Gross individual earnings	Employer cost



Year
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings. The 'employer cost' series includes employer National Insurance contributions.

Figure 21 shows that earnings inequality has fallen across most of the distribution since the early 1990s, as captured by both the 90:10 and 50:10 measures of earnings inequality. Again, we see rising male earnings inequality offset by falling female inequality and inequality between men and women. The difference between the fall in the 90:10 and stagnation in the Gini coefficient reflects rising top earnings inequality, which continued to increase over this period.
Figure 21. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time
All: 90:10 ratio	Male: 90:10 ratio	Female: 90:10 ratio
All: 50:10 ratio	Male: 50:10 ratio	Female: 50:10 ratio


11.0
10.0
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0

5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0



Year


Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings.
Figure 22 shows the growth in earnings across the distribution. It shows similar trends to Figure 13, which plots the change in wages over the same periods. However, the rise in male earnings

inequality between 1980 and the Great Recession was steeper than the rise in male wage inequality, reflecting the fall in hours worked among low-wage men. For women, earnings inequality rose by less than wage inequality between 1980 and 1994 and fell by more between 1994 and 2007, as hours worked increased most for low-wage women. Figure 23 shows that including employer taxes once again makes little difference to the trends.

Figure 22. Annualised growth in gross earnings by earnings percentile, overall and sex, selected periods

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2



10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Male	Female	All












    Earnings percentile Male	Female	All











Earnings percentile

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2



10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Male	Female	All


    Earnings percentile Male	Female	All











Earnings percentile


Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings.



Figure 23. Annualised growth in gross earnings and employer cost by earnings percentile, selected periods

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2



10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Gross Individual Earnings












    Earnings percentile Gross Individual Earnings Employer Cost
2007 to 2019






Earnings percentile

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Gross Individual Earnings



Earnings percentile


Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60 with strictly positive earnings.

4.5 Self-employment
There has been a steady rise in self-employment in the UK since around 2000, after a decline in the previous decade (Figure 24). This is entirely driven by a rise in solo self-employment; the share of workers who are self-employed with employees fell over this period. The rise was concentrated among women and those with less education (Figure 25), and the former reflects not only rising female employment but also an increasing share of the self-employed among workers. Rates of self-employment increased most among those with low earnings, with the increase in self-employment since the Great Recession almost entirely concentrated in the bottom 20% of the earnings distribution (Figure 26). We do not include the pandemic for these charts on self-employment as there were a number of difficulties correctly capturing changes in self-employment in the pandemic, particularly because some people realised that they were not actually self-employed as they had access to pandemic-related financial support restricted to employees.

Figure 24. Share of employees and self-employed workers, over time
All self-employed	Solo self-employed Other self-employed	Employees (right axis)
20%
18%
16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%





100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%


Year



Note: Individuals age 25-60 years of age. 'Solo self-employed' are self-employed without employees, 'Other self-employed' include self-employed with employees and family workers. Data from 2020-21 have been excluded because self- employment data in this year are less reliable. Workers are defined as self-employed if they receive more income from self-employment than they do from employment.
Figure 25. Share self-employed by sex and education, over time
Male ISCED 0-2	Male ISCED 3-4	Male ISCED 5-8
Male All	Female ISCED 0-2	Female ISCED 3-4
Female ISCED 5-8	Female All
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
Year



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. 'Solo self-employed' are self-employed without employees, 'Other self-employed' includes self-employed with employees and family workers. Data from 2020-21 have been excluded because self- employment data in this year are less reliable. Workers are defined as self-employed if they receive more income from self-employment than they do from employment.



Figure 26. Share self-employed by percentile of individual earnings, selected
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
0	5	10  15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
Percentile

1968	1994	2007	2019


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Five-year smoothing has been applied. Workers are defined as self-employed if they receive more income from self-employment than they do from employment.

5. Labour market institutions
This section looks at labour market institutions that affect earnings and incomes: minimum wages and collective bargaining, and self-employment. As in most of this report, all analysis is restricted to workers aged 25-60.

5.1 Minimum wage and unions
The bite of the minimum wage has increased steadily since its introduction in 1999, as shown in Figure 27, with a particularly large increase in 2016. As a share of median net wages, it rose from 47% in 1999 to 60% in 2016 and 62% in 2019. It is set to reach 66% by 2024. The share of workers earning below 120% of the minimum wage rose from 13% after its introduction to 27% in 2019.

Figure 27. Bite of the minimum wage, over time


35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

-0.1



Year



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The minimum wage used is the minimum wage for over 25s. The blue line shows the share of workers with a wage inferior to 1.2 times the minimum wage (left-hand side). The yellow and green lines are the ratio of the minimum wage to the median wage for the net wage and the labor cost (right-hand side). Periods in which the minimum wage was at a given value do not exactly correspond to financial years, so in this figure '1999' on the horizontal axis corresponds to '1 January 1999', and each datapoint is plotted at the midpoint of the period to which it corresponds.
Figure 28 shows union density for all employees in the UK since 1968, and the proportion of workers for whom trade union negotiations affect pay and conditions. It also shows the same rates for 25-60-year-olds for more recent years. After various reforms in the 1980s weakening the power of trade unions, union coverage declined from a peak of 52% in 1980 to 36% in 1994 and 24% in 2019. The proportion of employees whose contracts are impacted by collective bargaining has declined even more drastically, from a high of 85% in 1975 to 27% in 2019. This suggests that the spillover influence of trade unions on non-members has declined drastically over time.



Figure 28. Union density and fraction of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements, over time
Union density (OECD)	Collective contract coverage rate (OECD)
Union density (LFS)	Collective contract coverage rate (LFS)
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%


Year

Note: The sample for the OECD series is all employees, and the sample for the LFS series is those aged 25-60. In both cases the denominator is the number of employees.
Source: OECD, Authors' calculations using data from the Labour Force Survey, 2001-22.




5.2 The effects of taxes and state benefits across the income distribution
Figures 29-32 together show the importance of state benefits and direct taxes in redistributing incomes from richer to poorer households, and how that has changed. Figure 29 shows that in 2019, just before the pandemic, 29% of gross income for the poorest 25% of households was made up of state benefits, compared to 11% for the second quartile and essentially nothing for the top quartile. The reliance on state benefits for low-income families fell in the late 1990s as unemployment fell, and stayed flat in the early 2000s as there was higher employment but also increases in in-work benefits - the importance of benefits rose in the second quartile too.
Following rises in the Great Recession, the importance of benefits fell again as there was an economic recovery and reductions in benefit generosity, before ticking up during the pandemic due to an increase in support in the welfare system. Figure 30 shows there is much less difference both across the distribution and over time in terms of the importance of direct taxes.

Figure 29. Benefits as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile
Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

Figure 30. Direct taxes as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile
Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

Figure 31 brings this together and shows disposable income as a fraction of gross income; the most obvious interesting trend here is the rising importance of benefits for the second quartile and the falling importance for the first quartile, and a greater similarity in terms of direct taxes between those two quartiles. Figure 32 also incorporates employer National Insurance contributions, but this does not make an important difference.



Figure 31. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile
    Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile 100%
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%
70%
65%
60%
55%
50%


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

Figure 32. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income and employer social security contributions, by net household income quartile
    Bottom Quartile	2nd Quartile	3rd Quartile	Top Quartile 100%
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%
70%
65%
60%
55%
50%


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

6. Household incomes
This section looks at trends in household incomes. We start by looking at trends in household composition and the degree of assortative matching, which partly determine household earnings. We then compare trends in household earnings and household disposable income for working households, drawing out the role of the tax and transfer system over time. Finally, we show a set of charts on trends in household income inequality across all households (including those where no one is in work).

Trends in household income inequality are driven by earnings inequality, patterns of assortative matching and other trends in family composition, and the tax and benefit system. This section will first consider patterns in household composition, and how individual earnings inequality translates into household earnings inequality. It then looks at household disposable income, taking account of taxes and benefits, and looking at individuals from all households rather than just workers or working households.

6.1 Trends in household composition
There has been a rise in assortative matching in the UK over the past four decades. First, rates of marriage and cohabitation have fallen most among low-educated individuals. Figure 33 shows that in 1978, graduates (ISCED 6-8) were less likely to be married or cohabiting than those with lower levels of education. This had reversed by 2020: while the share of graduates (ISCED 6-8) who were married or cohabiting in 2020 was similar to the share in 1978, the share of those with medium levels of education (ISCED 3-5) had fallen from 84% to 69%, and the share of those with little or no education (ISCED 0-2) had fallen from 85% to 61%.

Figure 33. Share married/cohabiting, overall and by education, over time
ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8	All
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0


Year
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.

Figure 34 shows a similar pattern when looking at individual earnings, rather than education. For men, the positive correlation between individual earnings and the likelihood of being in a couple has become stronger over time. For women, this relationship was negative in 1968 (high-earning women were less likely to be a couple), whereas in 2019 there was a positive correlation. Further, high-earning individuals are now more likely to have a partner who works than before. In 1968, men in the 95th percentile of earnings were 9 percentage points less likely to have a working partner than those in the 15th percentile of earnings (though they were more likely to have a



partner at all), while in 2019 they were 6 percentage points more likely. Finally, for couples in which both partners work, the positive correlation between partners' earnings is now stronger than before, as shown in Figure 35. The combined impact of these changes is to push up inequality in household earnings.

Figure 34. Share married/cohabiting and share with working partner, by sex and individual gross earnings percentile, selected years
Working: Married/cohabiting	Working: Has a working partner
 Non-working: Married/cohabiting	 Non-working: Has a working partner


100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%




110%
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%




100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%













Male gross earnings percentile













Male gross earnings percentile














Male gross earnings percentile









Female gross earnings percentile









Female gross earnings percentile


	2019,Females 








Female gross earnings percentile



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Married/cohabitating also includes civil partnerships. The proportion with a working partner is conditional on being married or cohabiting.


Figure 35. Mean gross earnings percentile of partner/spouse by individual's gross earnings percentile, selected years



70	70
65	65
60	60
55	55
50	50
45	45
40	40
35	35
30	30
Female gross earnings percentile



Male gross earnings percentile



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 (with strictly positive earnings for defining earnings percentiles). Married/cohabitating also includes civil partnerships. Mean earnings of partners are plotted as five-point moving averages across the earnings distribution.
Looking at family structure more broadly, the share of prime working-aged adults who are single without children has increased from 4% in 1968 to 12% in 2021 (Figure 36). The share of single parents has also increased, from less than 1% in 1968 2% in 1980 and 4% in 2021 (it has been broadly stable since 1994). Figure 37 shows that the increase in the share of single people without children was concentrated among those with little or no education for women (ISCED 0-2) and among those without university degrees for men (ISCED 0-2 and 3-5). For both men and women, graduates (ISCED 6-8) are now more likely to be in a couple with children than in the early 2000s. The rise in the share of single parents has been almost entirely concentrated among women, especially women with lower levels of education, though there has been a rise among women with degree-level qualifications too.

Figure 36. Share of individuals by position in the household, over time
 Single, no children	 Single, children	 Couple, no children
   Couple, children	 Adult Child	 Other 100%
90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. 'Single, children' and 'Couple, children' refer to children aged 0-18. Parents of adult children are categorized as 'other'. Pre-1994 'adult child' refers only to adults living in a household whose head is their parent due to data limitations.
Figure 37. Share of individuals by position in the household, by sex and education, over time
 Single, no children	 Single, children	 Couple, no children
    Couple, children	 Adult Child	 Other 100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%


Year	Year



100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%


Year	Year

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%


Year	Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. 'Single, children' and 'couple, children' refer to children aged 0-18. Parents of adult children are categorized as 'other'. Pre-1994 'adult child' refers only to adults living in a household whose head is their parent due to data limitations.

6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households
Rising levels of employment since the mid-1990s mean that the share of individuals a working household has risen over the last few decades, as illustrated by Figure 38. In particular, the share of graduates in a working household increased from 92% in 1995 to 97% in 2019 (before the pandemic hit). Since the late 1990s, there has been a decline in the share of those with no or low- level qualifications in a working household, though part of this is likely to reflect the fact that this group is increasingly negatively selected.

Figure 38. Share of individuals in a working household, overall and by education, over time
ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8	All
100%
95%
90%
85%
80%
75%
70%
65%
60%


Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work.
We now consider how all the trends above combine to explain trends in household earnings, and how interactions with the tax and benefit system generate trends in disposable household income. Figure 39 shows gross household earnings and disposable household income over time for working households. The trend in disposable household income is similar to earnings, but smoother, as tax and benefit changes have smoothed out economic shocks over the years. The trend in disposable household incomes for non-working households, and therefore overall, is smoother still, as labour market shocks have less of an effect on the incomes of this group.
Furthermore, compared to many countries in this set of reports, increases in state benefits have in general allowed the incomes of workless households to grow alongside growth in working households over the long run.



Figure 39. Median real gross household earnings and disposable household (HH) income among working households, over time
Gross household earnings (working HHs) Disposable household income (working HHs) Disposable household income (non-working HHs)
30

25

20

15

10

5

0


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. For median gross household earnings we have restricted the sample to those with strictly positive household earnings. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

Figure 40 shows that for most of the last five decades, taxes and benefits dampened the impact of rising earnings inequality on disposable income inequality among working households. In the periods between 1968 and 1980 and between 1994 and 2007, disposable household incomes grew by the same amount across the distribution, despite stronger growth in household earnings towards the top of the distribution. The tax and benefit system also dampened the rise in household earnings inequality in the 1980s, though the effect was far from complete. Between 1980 and 1994, disposable household incomes among working households rose by an average of 3.7% a year at the 95th percentile of household incomes, compared to 0.9% at the 5th percentile; the corresponding figures for household earnings were -1.7% and 4.2%, respectively.
Since 2007, household earnings have either been stagnant or fallen slightly across the distribution. The tax and benefit system has supported incomes particularly for low-earning working households. But this distributional pattern is driven by the Great Recession, and Cribb et al. (2023) show that since 2011, when the acute crisis was over, the pattern reversed. More progressive hourly wage growth for males and females, in part driven by the minimum wage, as well as an end to the downward trend in low-wage males' hours, resulted in reduced inequalities in household earnings in the bottom 85% of the distribution. For example, earnings grew by 1.9% per year for at the 10th percentile and just 1% at the 90th. However, large cuts to working-age benefits meant that inequality actually increased in disposable household income, which grew by 0.6% for the 10th percentile, and 0.8% for the 90th, among working households. The most recent decade therefore stands in contrast to those before, with tax and benefit changes offsetting decreasing earnings inequality, rather than the other way around.
Figure 40. Annualised growth in real gross household earnings and household disposable income for working households, by percentile, selected years



5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2


5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2














Percentile













Percentile

5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2


5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2














Percentile



Percentile


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. For the household earnings series we have restricted the sample to those with strictly positive earnings. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.


6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households
This section brings together the trends shown above to look at inequality in disposable household incomes across all households. Figure 41 shows that median real disposable household incomes stagnated for lower-educated groups and fell for those with degree-level qualifications (ISCED 6- 8), who saw a fall in wages during the Great Recession and were less eligible for support made available during the crisis. There was only a very muted response to average disposable incomes during 2020 and 2021 despite the economic disruption caused by the pandemic.

Figure 41. Median real disposable household income for all households, overall and by education, over time
ISCED 0-2	ISCED 3-5	ISCED 6-8	All
30

25

20

15

10

5

0


Year



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Incomes are in 2019-20 prices. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

Figures 42 and 43 show that measures of inequality in disposable household incomes - including the Gini coefficient, the top 1% share, the relative poverty rate and the 90:10 ratio - were relatively stable in the 1960s and 1970s before rising sharply in the 1980s. Inequality across most of the distribution (the 90:10 ratio) and at the bottom of the distribution (the relative poverty rate) fell between 1990 and the Great Recession, as the tax and benefit system offset rising earnings inequality for working households, and rising employment rates reduced earnings inequality across all households. However, rising inequality at the top (the 1% share) meant that the Gini coefficient remained stable over this period.

The Great Recession saw reductions in the Gini coefficient and the 90:10 ratio, likely driven by support delivered through the welfare system during the acute crisis as the labour market struggled, while the share of income of the top 1% fell. From the recovery from the recession up to 2019, however, there was an uptick in the 90:10 ratio, driven by increasing inequality in the lower half of the distribution, because of reductions to working-age benefits as discussed above.
Relative poverty has therefore also increased as growth in bottom incomes lagged behind the median. Meanwhile, share of the top 1%, while volatile in part due to measurement difficulties, has increased since the post-recession fall.

Figure 42. Gini, relative poverty and top 1% share of net household income for all households, over time



50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%

Gini	Gini (winsorised)



10%
9%
8%
7%
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%



Year

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with less than 60% of contemporaneous median income before the deduction of housing costs. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale. Incomes below 0 are winsorised to 0 due to data limitations. The winsorised Gini series is also winsorised at the 99th percentile.



Figure 43. Percentile ratios of disposable household incomes for all households, over time

90:10 ratio	50:10 ratio	90:50 ratio

5.00
4.50
4.00
3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The inequality measures are based on incomes measured net of taxes and benefits but before housing costs have been deducted. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

7. Immigration
This final section examines changes in the population that are driven by changes in immigration. In this section we take the definition of an immigrant as a person who was born abroad, noting that this will include both British citizens born to British parents abroad, and people who arrived in the UK after birth to non-British parents but who have spent essentially all their life in the UK.
Figure 44 shows that the fraction of the working-age (25-60) population who were born abroad was broadly flat through the mid 1990s, rising in the late 1990s, and accelerated after 2004 when the European Union expanded and the UK allowed citizens of new member states to come to the UK. This chart uses data from the Labour Force Survey (LFS), rather than the Family Resources Survey (FRS), as the FRS only contains this information since 2008, though it shows similar patterns since then. The Figure shows that the fraction of the working-age population that was born abroad rose from 9% in 1993 to 15% in 2008 to 21% in 2021.
Figure 44. Share of immigrants in the population 25-60 years of age, 1993-2021

25%


20%


15%


10%


5%


0%


Year


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A migrant is defined as someone who was born outside the UK.

Source: Labour Force Survey.
Figure 45 shows the position of immigrants in the income distribution, and how that has changed. Immigrants in 2008 were particularly clustered towards the bottom, and top, of the income distribution, but by 2019 this had changed and they were much more evenly spread across the population, with the biggest growth in the middle of the distribution over the 11 years. Figure 46 shows that on average, immigrants have very high education levels and similar labour market outcomes to UK born people, with the exception of lower levels of female employment. On average, median disposable income is 7% lower than for the British-born population.



Figure 45. Share of 25-60-year-olds born abroad, by equivalised disposable income decile,
30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Equivalised disposable income decile


Note: We only observe immigration status in the FRS from 2008 onwards. Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A migrant is defined as someone who was born outside the UK. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with less than 60% of contemporaneous median income before the deduction of housing costs.

Source: Family Resources Survey.

Figure 46. Outcomes for migrants relative to UK-born individuals aged 25-60, 2019-20
180%
160%
140%
120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%







Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A migrant is defined as someone who was born outside the UK. Household incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

8. References
Belfield, C., Blundell, R., Cribb, J., Hood, A., and Joyce, R., 2017. Two decades of income inequality in Britain: The role of wages, household earnings and redistribution. Economica, 84(334), 157-79.

Blundell, R., Costa Dias, M., Cribb, J., Joyce, R., Waters, T., Wernham, T., and Xu, X., 2022. Inequality and the Covid crisis in the United Kingdom. Annual Review of Economics, 14, 607-36

Blundell, R., Joyce, R., Norris Keiller, A., and Ziliak, J., 2018. Income inequality and the labour market in Britain and the US. Journal of Public Economics, 162(2018), 48-62.

Cribb, J., and Johnson, P., 2023. Policies to preserve worker-firm links during the pandemic: Lessons from the UK's coronavirus job retention scheme. In M. Strain and S. Veuger (eds), Preserving Links in the Pandemic: Policies to Maintain Worker-Firm Attachment in the OECD. Washington DC: AEI Press.

Cribb, J., Joyce, R., Wernham, T., 2023. Twenty five year of income inequality in Britain: The role of wages, household earnings and redistribution. Fiscal Studies, 44(3), 251-74.

Data
Department for Work and Pensions, NatCen Social Research. (2021). Family Resources Survey. [data series]. 4th Release. UK Data Service. SN: 200017, DOI: http://doi.org/10.5255/UKDA- Series-200017

Office for National Statistics. (2019). Family Expenditure Survey. [data series]. 3rd Release. UK DataService. SN: 200016, DOI: http://doi.org/10.5255/UKDA-Series-200016

Office for National Statistics. (2023). Labour Force Survey. [data series]. 9th Release. UK Data Service. SN: 2000026, DOI: http://doi.org/10.5255/UKDA-Series-200002

9. Data appendix
Surveys used:

? We use cross-sectional data from the Family Resources Survey (FRS) for the years 1994- 2021, the Family Expenditure Survey (FRS) for the years 1968-93, and the Labour Force Survey (LFS) since 1975.

? The FRS is a cross-sectional survey of usually 20,000-30,000 households per year. It collects detailed data on earnings, hours of work, and incomes from a variety of sources, as well as other characteristics of the households and their members. It is the basis for official statistics on income poverty and income inequality in the UK as calculated by the UK's Department for Work and Pensions. Years are UK financial years running from April of the stated year until the following March.

? The FES is a cross-sectional survey of around 7,000 households per year. Its primary purpose is to collect information on household expenditure on goods and services, but it also collects information on earnings and income from other sources, as well as other characteristics of the households and their members. We use the FES for years before 1994 when FRS data were unavailable.

? The LFS is a long running cross-sectional survey of around 100,000 people per quarter since 1992. It has been a quarterly survey since 1992 and was annual (or less frequent) between 1975 and 1991. It mainly collects information on individuals' background characteristics and labour market statistics. We only use these data for looking at unemployment rates and the immigration chart.

Measurement of hours, earnings, income
? Earnings from employment are measured by asking respondents who were employed at the time they were surveyed the amount they were paid on the pay date closest to the interview. These earnings (plus bonuses received over the last 12 months) are converted into nominal annual amounts.

o In the FRS, where respondents report that their last pay was unusual for particular reasons (absence, irregular overtime, tax rebates), we take their self-reported 'usual pay' rather than their last pay.

? Earnings from self-employment are measured by taking the previous year's accounts of those self-employed at the time of survey, as submitted to HMRC, and measuring the profit or loss. We then uprate this amount to current year's earnings. In some circumstances, such as when accounts are unavailable, we use alternative data on the amount of money they usually draw from their business, or if they have no business, information on their income after paying for materials, equipment etc.

? Benefits in kind are not recorded fully either for employees or for the self-employed (for whom they are likely to be particularly important). Benefits in kind include vehicles, computers and mobile phones purchased by the business that are also for personal use. The value of these can be difficult to quantify. Therefore, the overall value of the monetary benefits other than income from self-employment in particular is likely to be underestimated.

? Information is also collected on benefits households are claiming at the time of survey, and the value of the most recent payments. In some cases, where an amount received is reported as unusual, we use the self-reported 'usual' amount received. The benefit payments are then converted into an annual amount based on the payment period covered.



? For those at the top of the income distribution, we make an adjustment when looking at total disposable household income, drawing from data from HMRC's Survey of Personal Incomes (SPI). This adjustment assigns those with income above a very high threshold an income amount derived from the SPI, which is an estimated average income for those above that threshold in the population. The purpose of the adjustment is to deal with low response rates from individuals with very high incomes, and volatility in reports of their incomes.

Weighting
? In all surveys responses are weighted up to population totals to make the data representative along a variety of characteristics, including (depending on the year) age, sex, region, tenure and family type.

Data collected during the pandemic
? During 2020-21, the FRS continued to be collected, but fieldwork was disrupted, with face-to-face interviewing replaced with telephone interviewing for the whole of 2020-21. Sample size was also reduced to around half the size of recent years. Response rates were affected, for example those from lower-educated groups responded less than in previous years, and there was an imbalance in the size of the sample throughout the year.

? In order to mitigate the impact on response rates in particular, the weighting methodology was changed to ensure representativeness of different education groups, and to ensure that statistics were a representative year average.

? Questions on earnings, hours, incomes etc. were the same, but it cannot be ruled out that differences in the sample and question methodology affected statistics based on these, so increased caution should be exercised when interpreting results from 2020-21 and to a lesser extent 2021-22.

10. Appendix: additional charts
Figure 47. Annualised growth in hourly wages among employees by wage percentile, overall and by sex, selected periods

5	Male	Female

4

3

2

1

0

5	Male	Female

4

3

2

1

0



Percentile

5	Male	Female

4

3

2

1

0

Percentile

4	Male	Female

3

2

1

0

-1


Percentile	Percentile


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-74 with strictly positive hourly wages.



Figure 48. Annualised growth in mean hours worked among employees by hourly wage ventile, overall and by sex, selected years
Male	Female
2.0

1.0

0.0

-1.0

-2.0

-3.0

-4.0





3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

-1.0

-2.0

-3.0

Hourly wage ventile
Male	Female


Hourly wage ventile

Male	Female
2.0


1.0


0.0


-1.0


-2.0



2.0



Hourly wage ventile
Male	Female



1.0


0.0


-1.0


-2.0
Hourly wage ventile

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-74 with strictly positive hourly wages. We pool data from across the three years to obtain the hourly wage for each 3-year period.




















Figure 49. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time





0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15

All	Male	Female


Year
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-74 with strictly positive earnings. We exclude the bottom and top 1% of the gender-specific gross earnings distribution.

Figure 50. Annualised growth in gross earnings by earnings percentile, overall and sex, selected periods

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2



10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Male	Female	All












    Earnings percentile Male	Female	All











Earnings percentile

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2



10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Male	Female	All



    Earnings percentile Male	Female	All











Earnings percentile


Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-74 with strictly positive earnings.



Figure 51. Outcomes for migrants relative to UK-born individuals, and their children, aged 25- 45, 2019
160%

140%

120%

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%







Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-45. A migrant is defined as someone who was born outside the UK. Household incomes and earnings have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
































































































































































































lnstitute for Fiscal Studies

Country Studies: Inequalities in Europe and North America
A parallel study to the IFS Deaton Review

Bradley Hardy Shria Holla Elizabeth Krause James Ziliak





Inequality in the United States: 1975-2022






















Inequality in the United States: 1975-2022
Bradley L. Hardy, Georgetown University Shria Holla, University of Kentucky Elizabeth Krause, University of Kentucky James P. Ziliak, University of Kentucky

Contents
Inequality in the United States: 1975-2022	1
1. Executive summary	2
2. Institutional background	3
3. Notes on data and measurement	6
4. Individual employment and earnings	8
4.1 Trends in employment	8
4.2 Trends in hourly wages	12
4.3 Trends in hours worked	17
4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work	19
4.5 Self-employment	24
5. Labour market institutions	26
5.1 Minimum wage and unions	26
5.2 Benefits from the state	27
6. Household incomes	30
6.1 Trends in household composition	30
6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households	34
6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households	35
7. Immigrant outcomes	38
8. Appendix	40
Acknowledgements: We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation (Grant 2214640) through the Trans-Atlantic Platform Recovery, Renewal and Resilience in a Post-Pandemic World. The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not reflect the opinions of any sponsoring agency.


















(c) Institute for Fiscal Studies	1

1. Executive summary
We use data from nearly five decades of the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement to examine trends in employment, hours worked, wages, earnings, and after-tax and transfer income levels, growth and inequality in the United States from 1975 to 2022.
Among prime-age individuals aged 25-60 there has been substantial convergence in employment rates of men and women, from a 30 percentage point gap in the mid-1970s to about a 10 point gap in 2022. The gender convergence in employment came both from an increase in work among women until the 1980s, as well as a long secular decline in work among men with less than a college degree.
The employment gains of women were accompanied by rising median real hourly wages among those with some post-secondary education, while the corresponding wages of men were either stagnant or declining among those with fewer advanced education credentials, and rose modestly for those with at least a college degree. The consequence of the wage disparities across education groups is a strong increase in wage inequality over the past four decades in the US among both men and women, with the overall Gini index of wage inequality increasing by one-fifth and by 40% among men.
Because real wages of women increased over the sample period, and average hours worked rose modestly, median earnings for women increased by 70% in real terms since the mid-1970s, resulting in a narrowing of the gender earnings gap in the middle. The story for men is more about stagnant earnings in the middle of the distribution, consistent with stable wages and hours, but because the wages at the top of the male distribution were increasing relative to the bottom, earnings inequality of men increased sharply over time. The exact opposite occurred among women, with sharp declines in earnings inequality, at least until the year 2000.
The declines in the real minimum wage and in union coverage have often been attributed to the rise in male earnings inequality in the US. We examine how the minimum wage has evolved in relation to the median of the net wage, finding that it falls dramatically from nearly 0.75 in 1980 to
0.4 by 2022. An equally dramatic decline of 50% in terms of union density or coverage by a collective bargaining agreement is likewise observed over the past four decades.
An important aspect of understanding inequality requires understanding how individuals and families are able to bundle resources, that is, to what degree they are able to rely on labour market income as opposed to income from social insurance and means-tested transfers, and how this varies across the income distribution. We find that households in the bottom quartile of the net income distribution draw about 1 dollar in every 5 from benefits, rising to almost 1 in 3 during recent severe recessions. In the US, though, much of the redistribution comes via the tax code with refundable in-work tax credits, and most recently, with substantial direct payments from the Department of Treasury during the COVID-19 pandemic. This resulted in dramatic reductions in average tax burdens in the bottom half of the income distribution, becoming negative in fact for lowest-income households during the Great Recession and COVID-19.
There has been a long-term retreat from marriage in the US, especially among those with less than a college education. This then begs the question of whether there is assortative matching in marriage markets; that is, whether marriage rates are increasing in the earnings distribution, and earnings of the partner increasing in the earnings distribution of the spouse. The answer to both of these questions is a definitive yes. The gradient of the partner's earnings has increased sharply since the 1970s, resulting in greater divergence in household incomes among the highly educated than among those with fewer formal credentials. A consequence has been rising inequality in after-tax and transfer household incomes (the 90:10 ratio increasing by 50%) despite expansions in the social safety net supporting families (especially those with children) in the lower third of the income distribution. The importance of the safety net in redistribution was laid bare in COVID-19 with the whipsawing of 90:10 disposable income inequality sharply falling in 2020 and 2021 and then rebounding in 2022 when the temporary expansion of refundable tax credits, unemployment insurance and stimulus payments expired.

2. Institutional background
In this section we briefly summarise some of the key institutional features of the US social safety net and tax system, and labour market policies.
Safety net programmes in the US fall into one of two broad categories of social insurance and means-tested transfers, where social insurance generally has a tie to employment, military service or old age and means-tested transfers are conditioned on low incomes and low assets. The major social insurance programmes are Social Security retirement and survivors benefits, Medicare, Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI), Workers' Compensation, Unemployment Insurance (UI), and Veterans Benefits. The key means-tested transfer programmes are Medicaid, Supplemental Security Income, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, housing assistance, and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). The other key means-tested programmes that are directly tied to employment are the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and the Additional Child Tax Credit.
Social insurance
Social Security retirement is targeted to workers who have accumulated at least 40 quarters of covered employment, and monthly cash benefits are paid out as a progressive function of pre- retirement earnings. The normal retirement age is 67 for persons born after 1959 (65 for earlier cohorts), though early receipt starting at age 62 is possible subject to a 30% benefit penalty.
Funding for the programme comes from an earnings tax of 12.4% up to a cap ($160,200 in 2023), which is shared equally by the employer and employee. Self-employed persons pay the full 12.4%, but can deduct half of that from their federal income tax.
Medicare is an in-kind transfer that provides health insurance for persons aged 65 and over, as well as some disabled persons under age 65, regardless of previous work history. Basic coverage is available to all seniors, but most purchase expanded coverage via a monthly premium, the size of which increases with income. Financing of Medicare comes from an earnings tax (the rate is a lower 2.9% and it applies to all labour market earnings), general federal income tax, and premiums.
SSDI is restricted to those workers under normal retirement age who have worked in at least five of the last 10 years and can no longer hold gainful employment owing to medically certified disability, which may or may not have been work-related. The monthly cash benefit amount is proportional to average lifetime earnings prior to disability, and it is financed out of the same Social Security payroll tax revenues that cover retirement benefits. Another disability insurance programme is Workers' Compensation for those suffering a work-related injury. Most of the benefits paid out are to cover medical expenses, though roughly one-fourth are paid out for lost wages. Workers' Compensation programmes vary from state to state, and benefits are financed by what is known as an experience-rated tax on employers, that is, the tax rate is higher for those firms with greater workplace injuries and benefits claims. Finally, the Veterans Benefits programme provides disability benefits to those armed-forces members injured during service, and it also provides medical benefits, cash and educational assistance to qualifying veterans.
UI is available to workers in covered employment who have worked at least four out of the last five calendar quarters, are unemployed through no fault of their own, and are actively seeking work. Benefit amounts vary widely across states, though typically it is a function of past wages, subject to a cap. Normal UI receipt lasts up to 26 weeks, but the Extended Benefits Program that is triggered by Congressional action in periods of high unemployment allows for extensions up to 13 weeks, and the latter can be renewed such as in the Great Recession of 2007-09 when UI eligibility lasted up to 99 weeks. The programme is administered at the state level and funded by an experience-rated tax on employers, with those employers with greater propensity to lay off workers facing higher rates. Historically the programme has not been open to the self-employed and seasonal workers, but this was temporarily extended during the COVID-19 pandemic, eligibility returning to pre-COVID rules by the later part of 2021.
Means-tested transfers

Medicaid is an in-kind health insurance programme that was established in 1965 alongside Medicare, but unlike Medicare, the programme is targeted to low-income and low-asset individuals and families. Many parameters relating to eligibility and benefit coverage are set at the state level, with funding for the programme from a federal and state matching grant programme where the state's share is declining in state per capita personal income and capped at 50%. During the COVID-19 pandemic the federal government picked up a larger share of the cost of Medicaid, with normal sharing rates resuming in January 2024. States also were not allowed to remove participants from the programme regardless of changes in economic status, but this provision ended in March 2023.
The Supplemental Security Income programme provides cash assistance to low-income elderly persons, the blind, and the disabled, where the latter do not require a work history to qualify and thus children are included among the populations served. The programme has substantial federal oversight, with funding, benefit and eligibility criteria set at the federal level. Most states supplement the federal grant for individuals living independently.
The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families programme provides a mix of cash and in-kind benefits to low-income and asset families with dependent children under age 18. Most features of programme design are controlled by the states, but primary funding comes from a federal block grant to each state that has been fixed in nominal terms since 1997. States are obligated to support the programme out of their own funds as well, leaving inflation-adjusted total spending relatively constant since 2000. Eligibility for the programme does require work or work-related activities, though families can be exempt for certain child- or dependent-care duties, or other hardship.
The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program provides in-kind food assistance to low-income and low-asset persons regardless of age and family structure. The benefit is delivered monthly via a debit card, and it is redeemable for food from certified outlets for preparation and consumption in the home. Benefits and primary income and asset limits are federally financed and determined, though states are responsible for part of the cost of programme administration and eligibility. There is no formal work requirement for eligibility except for a limited group of non-disabled prime-age adults without dependents. During the COVID-19 crisis there were several temporary changes to the programme, including lifting all recipients to the maximum benefit amount for their household size, and subsequently a 15% increase in the maximum benefit. These expansions expired in 2021, but a permanent increase in the maximum benefit averaging about 21% was enacted in October 2021.
Housing assistance is an in-kind programme where most of the benefits are provided in the form of vouchers redeemable in the private rental housing market. Responsibility is devolved to local housing authorities, which number over 3,300 nationally. Individuals are expected to cover the first 30% of monthly rent, and then the voucher covers the remainder subject to a cap. Eligibility varies across housing authorities, but the basic income test requires family income to be less than some percentage of county median income, typically set at 50%. Funding comes from a fixed annual federal appropriation, meaning the programme is not an entitlement and thus most income-eligible families receive no assistance.
Income tax
Income tax is assessed at the federal, state, and in some cases local levels. The federal income tax rates and base are established by the US Congress, with administration by the Internal Revenue Service. The rates and applicable base vary by tax filing status, including married filing a joint return, married filing a separate return, head of household (e.g., lone parent with children) and single. Gross income subject to tax includes, among others, labour market earnings from employers or self, most forms of rental, interest, and dividend income and realised capital gains, as well as some forms of social insurance income such as UI. Means-tested transfer income are exempt from tax. Gross income is reduced to so-called taxable income via deductions, which can either be a set amount depending on tax filing status, known as the standard deduction, or itemised by the taxpayer such as interest expense on home mortgage, charitable donations, and a portion of state and local income tax. The federal return is filed annually by the taxpayer, with tax withheld each pay period for employees, and quarterly tax payments by the self-employed.
The federal tax structure has been reformed several times over the past four decades, including



in 1981, 1986, 1990, 1993, 1997, 2001, 2003,and 2017. At the onset of the 1981 reform there were 16 marginal tax brackets, but these were reduced to four after the Tax Reform Act of 1986, and currently number seven. The 1980s reforms also expanded the base subject to taxation, though subsequent reforms have in some cases contracted the base and in other cases expanded it. On top of the federal income tax, 41 states plus the District of Columbia levy a state income tax, which in some cases is a flat tax and in others a higher progressive tax structure. Typically the state anchors its taxable base to that subject to federal tax.
The tax code is used to provide additional (means-tested) assistance to low-income tax filers via tax credits. The EITC is a refundable credit available to low-income families and individuals with labour market earnings. The credit first phases in as earnings increase until a maximum is reached, then the credit is held constant over a range, and finally the credit is tapered away as earnings increase beyond the maximum. The generosity of the maximum credit increases with the number of qualifying children up to three (e.g., the maximum in 2023 is $6,604 for two children). If the value of the credit exceeds the amount of tax owed then the difference is refunded to the taxpayer. Funding for the credit is from federal tax revenues, though about one- half of the states have a separate state EITC funded from state revenues. The other refundable tax credit is the Child Tax Credit (CTC). Families with annual earnings of at least $2,500 are eligible for a $2,000 tax credit for each dependent child under age 17, with eligibility phasing out with income above a threshold. If the tax credit results in negative tax liability then those with very low incomes, or a large number of dependents, are eligible to have up to $1,500 per dependent refunded. During the COVID-19 pandemic the EITC was nearly tripled in value for single, childless workers, and eligibility for that population lowered to age 19 (provided they were not full-time students) from the current age 25. The refundable portion of the CTC was doubled during COVID, was made available to non-workers, and was payable monthly. Both the EITC and CTC expansions were only for the 2021 tax year, and returned to typical programme rules in 2022. Another tax credit targeted specifically at working taxpayers with children under age 13 (or older disabled dependents) with out-of-pocket childcare expenses, the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit (CDCTC), was also doubled in generosity and made refundable in 2021, but the extension expired after that tax year.

Labour market institutions
Labour markets in the United States are governed by a host of federal and state regulations affecting hiring, firing, and compensation practices, though in general US labour markets are regarded as being flexible among advanced economies. Indeed, with the exception of the state of Montana, employment is 'at will' in the US, meaning that employees may be terminated for any reason, except those that are illegal such as based on race, religion, age, or some other protected class. There is a federally set minimum wage of $7.25 per hour that affects most places of work, except for very small enterprises and some family-owned businesses and farms. This federal minimum was last changed in 2009 and is not tied to inflation, thus severely eroding the real value of the wage floor. Twenty-nine states and the District of Columbia have set minimum wages above the federal rate, and in some instances cities have set wages above the state rate. Lastly, workers have the right to organise in labour unions, and while employers are required to negotiate with union representatives, firms do reserve the right to permanently replace workers who engage in strike activity.

3. Notes on data and measurement
The data for the analysis come from the Current Population Survey (CPS) Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) for survey years 1976-2023 (calendar years 1975-2022). The ASEC serves as the official source of income and poverty statistics for the United States, and has been the workhorse dataset for research on earnings determinants and inequality in the US.
Unit of analysis and sample:
? For most of the analysis we restrict to those individuals aged 25-60, though for select charts we expand the age range to 16-74, and 25-74 in the Appendix.
? We exclude any observation with imputed earnings or hours of work, or with the entire ASEC imputed.
? The sample begins in calendar year 1975 because of the addition of hours worked per week to the survey to construct hourly wages.
? All statistics are weighted using the ASEC person supplement weight.
Definitions:
? Employment rate: the fraction of the population that is employed during the prior year, defined as those persons with positive earnings from paid or self-employment, as well as positive hours worked per week and weeks worked per year. The prior year is used to align the employment rate with the wage and salary income reference period. Levels of employment rate are lower when using survey week employment, but trends are little changed.
? Earnings: gross (pre-tax) annual real individual earnings from all jobs (includes business and farm self-employment).
o Top-coded values for years prior to 2011 survey are replaced by rank-proximity swap values provided by the US Census Bureau.
o The period to which earnings data refer is the prior calendar year.
o All nominal values are converted into real terms using the Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) with 2019 base year.
o In most calculations we include all workers regardless of their wage level, but where noted, in a couple of figures we exclude workers in the top and bottom 1% of the earnings distribution to minimise the influence of outliers.
? Hours of work: usual/ typical paid hours worked per week in the prior calendar year, including paid overtime. Excludes self-employed workers.
? Wages: The ratio of individual real pre-tax annual earnings divided by annual hours of work, the latter of which is defined as the product of usual hours worked times number of weeks worked. Excludes self-employed workers.
? Disposable household income (household equivalised income after deducting taxes and adding benefits and tax credits)
o Income includes: annual earnings from employment, profit or loss from self- employment, income from private pensions, investment income, income from educational grants and scholarships, cash welfare payments, cash social insurance payments, cash value of in-kind food assistance (SNAP).
o Income is net of taxes paid to federal, state, and Social Security/Medicare payroll taxes, inclusive of refundable tax credits. Taxes are estimated using the National Bureau of Economic Research TAXSIM program.
o Incomes are equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale, normalised to a single individual.
Splits:
? Sex: female, male
? Education: Education is split into three groups based on International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) classifications. ISCED 0-2, ISCED 3-5 and ISCED 6-8. In the typical nomenclature used in US-based analyses, these groupings refer those who drop out of high school, those with a high school diploma or some college, and those with at least 4 years of college, inclusive of graduate education. We use the following mapping and define ISCED 0-2 as low education attainment, ISCED 3-5 as medium education attainment, and ISCED 6-8 as high education attainment:



Years of education
ISCED
0-11
ISCED 0-2
12-15
ISCED 3-5
16+
ISCED 6-8
? Household type: Single without dependent children; single with dependent children; couples without dependent children; couples with dependent children; adult child; other. Parents of adult children go in the 'other' category. A dependent child is a child aged 0-18 or 19-23 and in full-time education, living with parents.

4. Individual employment and earnings
This section looks at trends in individual employment, education, wages and earnings. With respect to earnings, we first look separately at hourly wages and hours worked, before bringing them together in a set of charts on earnings inequality. Due to a lack of reliable data on hours worked for the self-employed, we restrict the analysis of wages and hours to employees, but include both employees and the self-employed in the analysis of total earnings.
4.1 Trends in employment
Figure 1 depicts employment rates in the US for persons aged 16-74 from survey years 1976-2023 (calendar years 1975-2022). In general, the trends show a convergence of female employment relative to male employment over time, especially among teens and young adults. However, among prime-age and older adults the convergence abated by 1990 and the within-age gender employment gaps have been quite stable for the past three decades. The other notable trend in the figure is a decline in employment post 1990 among teens and prime-age workers, but an increase among older adults. For example, teen and young adult male employment fell by over 30 percentage points, and by 10 points among 25-60-year-old men, and it was this strong decline in employment among men that led to the narrowing of the gender employment gap. We note that if we instead focus on survey week employment instead of work any time in the prior year then the level of employment rates falls by about 5-10 percentage points in any given year, but the trends are not altered (see Figure 47 in the Appendix).



Figure 1. Employment rates by age and sex, over time

Life-cycle employment patterns for select years are summarised in Figure 2. Here, the patterns across gender follow the basic pattern of a Mincer-style life-cycle model of rising, steady and then declining employment over the life cycle. Employment rates generally peak by the early 30s and hold steady before a steep decline as retirements and other types of labour force exits such as disability occur from the early 50s onward. There are also a number of interesting life-cycle patterns across decades. Middle-age employment among women increased substantially from 1976 to 1986 and again in 1996, before falling back starting in 2006. Among men the figure shows that after 1996 it took several more years for men to reach peak employment rates, possibly because of greater shares acquiring post-secondary education.
Figure 2. Employment rates over life cycle by sex, selected years

Education is a strong correlate and determinant of social and economic inequality. In Figure 3, we focus on the prime-age population of 25-60-year-olds to trace out attainment trends over time. The figure shows that workers with very low education (ISCED 0-2) are a declining share of the workforce over time, from about 30% in 1975 to just under 10% in 2022. Perhaps surprisingly, the share of adults aged 25-60 with a high school diploma or some college peaked in the early 1990s at about 60%. The implication is that there has been a strong secular growth in the share of persons with a college degree or more, with that share more than doubling to just over 40% by 2022.

Figure 3. Educational attainment over time

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
We further explore educational attainment by stratifying by gender in Figure 4. We broadly find that educational attainment patterns follow the same path for men and women. What these trends also confirm is the stylised fact in the US during the early 2000s of women overtaking men in completing at least 4 years of post-secondary education.
Figure 4. Educational attainment by sex, over time

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
In Figure 5 we expand upon Figure 1 and explore employment trends across the three educational groups. There we see that the post-2000 decline in employment pervades education attainment, but is particularly pronounced among those with lower education. Individuals with less education than a college degree experience a 10 percentage point decline in employment in the last two decades from 60% to 50% for ISCED 0-2 and from 80% to 70% for ISCED 3-5.



Figure 5. Employment rates by education, over time

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
In Figure 6, we explore differences in employment across education and sex. This series reveals important heterogeneity. In particular, increases in employment occur among females up until the year 2000, followed by a two-decade secular decline of about 10 percentage points among woman with less than a college education, but only a couple of percentage points among the highly educated group. Men with the lowest education (ISCED 0-2) mostly exhibit reduced employment over the last five decades, from over 80% employed in the prior year to 60%, while those with middle-level education have stable employment until the mid-1990s, followed by a steady decline of about 10 points to 80%. Higher-educated men likewise have stable employment until the mid-1990s, and then lose only a few points over the remaining sample period. These within-sex employment gaps across education groups point to widening labour market inequality among the highly educated and everyone else.
Figure 6. Employment rates by sex and education, over time

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 who have completed full-time education.
The labour force consists of those employed and those unemployed. In the United States to be considered unemployed the person must be actively seeking employment in the month preceding the survey, but how long that search for work takes varies over time and the business cycle.
Figure 7 presents trends in the unemployment rate by duration of unemployment. The sample is 25-60-year-olds who reported being unemployed during the survey week, split by those whose

spell of unemployment is considered short-term (52 weeks or fewer) and those whose spell is considered long-term (more than 52 weeks). In the typical year, most unemployment is short- term, though there was a noticeable uptick in long-term unemployment during the Great Recession of 2007-09 that persisted for several years afterwards. This stands in stark contrast to the severe recessions of 1981-82 and the COVID-19 pandemic, where the spikes in unemployment were mostly less than a year in duration.
Figure 7. Unemployment rate by duration of unemployment over time

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Unemployment rate is calculated as the fraction of labour force unemployed as of the survey week, split between short-term (1 year or less) and long-term (more than 1 year) duration of unemployment.

4.2 Trends in hourly wages
Figure 8 depicts inflation-adjusted median average hourly wages, disaggregated by sex, from 1975 to 2022. The sample is 25-60-year-olds who were employed in the prior year at positive earnings, but who report no self-employment earnings. The self-employed are dropped because of challenges separating hours of work into those reflecting production and those reflecting investment. The series reveals that male hourly wages fell sharply from the late 1970s to the early 1990s from $28 per hour to about $24 per hour. Male median wages remained fairly stable over the next two decades outside the brief increase in the late 1990s, and then accelerated sharply after 2013 to $27 by 2020 as labour markets tightened (Figure 7). However, the onset of rapid inflation in 2022 pulled real wages back down by $2 to levels found in the mid-1980s. On the other hand, female hourly earnings - while at a consistently lower level - converged towards those of their male counterparts from the 1970s to 2000, and then the gap at the median stabilised for the subsequent two decades. Median hourly wages overall fluctuated between $20 and $22 per hour for the first four decades of the sample, but did exhibit real growth in the half decade prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, albeit no faster than male wages and thus keeping gender gaps constant.



Figure 8. Median real hourly wage among employees, overall and by sex, over time

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60. Wages are in 2019 prices.

Examining trends in hourly wages by sex and education in Figure 9, we find that the previously described decline in male hourly wages is driven by men below ISCED group 6-8 - those with less than a college degree. However, the lowest education group actually did experience substantial real wage growth from 2014 to 2021, bringing them closer to levels from the mid-1980s.
Conversely, men in ISCED group 6-8 experience episodic real growth in the late 1980s, late 1990s, and late 2010s, although these periods are characterised by tepid growth so that median real wages only change by about $3 over the course of nearly 50 years. And regardless of education level, men experience declining median real wages in 2022. While females below ISCED group 6-8 do not show the same reduction over time in hourly wages as do men, their trend is relatively flat. Females in group 6-8 move from an hourly wage of $23 in 1975 to an hourly wage about $29 by 2022. Notably, though, most of that growth occurred in the 20 years from 1980to 2000, after which wages stabilised until the late 2010s.


Figure 9. Median real hourly wage among employees, by sex and education, over time

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60. Wages are in 2019 prices.
In Figure 10, we explore how hourly wages evolve over the life cycle, and how this evolution varies by sex and education. We further stratify to understand how these patterns change over three

distinct time periods: 1978-82, 1992-96 and 2015-19. What we observe is a pattern wherein women do not experience anything approaching a standard Mincer-type increase in wages over the life cycle in the 1978-82 period. Men with low education, on the other hand, experience hourly wage growth over the working life, while those with middle and high education experience wage growth until at least their mid-30s. This growth is especially strong from the ISCED 6-8 group of men. By the 1990s, there is more broad-based hourly earnings growth over the life cycle across sex in ISCED groups 3-5 and 6-8. Those with high school graduation or some college show a clear disparity in hourly wage growth across the life cycle between men - who exhibit growth between ages 25 and 55 - and women, whose wages are relatively flat after age 35. By the 2015- 19 period, there is more descriptive evidence of a more bifurcated economy in the US that disproportionately rewards workers with higher educational credentials. An interesting stylised fact that emerges here is a widening of the hourly wage gap for higher educated workers across sex over the life cycle. For workers with college degrees, male earnings continue to rise over the life cycle through the mid- to late 40s, whereas female earnings plateau around age 35. In contrast, the gender wage gap among high school dropouts (ISCED 0-2) is attenuated in recent decades because of the much worse life-cycle wage growth of low-skilled men.
Figure 10. Median real hourly wage among employees over life cycle, by sex and education










Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60. Wages are in 2019 prices.
In Figure 11, we tabulate estimates of hourly wage inequality by calculating Gini coefficients, both separately by sex, and also pooled. The sample excludes the self-employed and those with hourly wages in the top and bottom 1% of the gender-specific distribution. Here, what is revealed is a consistent increase in hourly wage inequality over time, from 0.29 in 1975 to 0.35 in 2022, or about a 21% increase. Initially, Gini wage inequality is roughly equivalent among men and women up until mid-1990s, after which point male hourly earnings inequality rises above that of women. As a consequence, male wage inequality increased by a more aggressive 10 Gini points.

Figure 11. Gini coefficient of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over time

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60. The top and bottom 1% of the gender-specific wage distribution are excluded.

Taking another snapshot at hourly wage inequality, in Figure 12 we depict 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of hourly earnings, across sex. In this case, we do not exclude those workers in the top and bottom of the wage distributions. Here what we reveal by looking within the distribution is that inequality is being driven more by growth at the top end of the hourly wage distribution. 90:10 hourly wage inequality (left-hand axis) is higher for both men and women than 50:10 inequality (right-hand axis) and increasing over time. The trend increase in 90:10 inequality is most pronounced in the 1980s, but it persists throughout the sample for both men and women, whereas 50:10 inequality is fairly flat from 1990 onward.
Figure 12. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of hourly wages among employees, overall and by sex, over

time
Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60.

Wage stagnation is a related topic of interest to inequality researchers and policymakers alike. We tabulate average annual growth rates for select years (1975-93, 1993-2006 and 2006-18) across the wage percentile distribution. This allows us to assess how, for example, wages have grown for the typical male or female employee at the 30th percentile of the wage distribution from the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s. What we find is fairly striking: throughout the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, hourly wage growth is negative throughout most of the male wage distribution, and positive but very small for women above the 25th percentile. Average annual growth improves throughout the 1993-2006 period, though for both men and women the highest rates of growth



occur at the tails of the hourly wage distribution. Finally, the 2006-18 period follows a similar U- shaped trend in wage growth, though with a level shift downward for both men and women. In each time period, women's hourly wage growth exceeds men's. In Figure 48 in the Appendix we expand the age range to 25-74 and report identical patterns.
Figure 13. Growth in hourly wages among employees by wage percentile, by sex, selected periods
Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60.
4.3 Trends in hours worked
We now turn to an examination of the levels and growth of weekly hours of work among non-self- employed workers. As presented in Figure 14, men consistently report a higher level of average weekly hours worked than women. This gap was about 8 hours per week, or that men worked on average a full day more than women, in the 1970s, but after the severe recession of 1981-82 this gender gap in hours worked started to narrow. This accelerated during the Great Recession so that by the end of the period women had closed the gap by about half.
Figure 14. Mean weekly hours worked among employees, overall and by sex, over time

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60.
Further disaggregating hours worked by sex and education in Figure 15, there are important gaps in hours worked for men and women based on educational attainment. Over much of the sample period, for both men and women, gaps in educational hours worked widen over time, starting in

the early 1980s. For men, however, this gap narrows after 2000 because of the decline in hours worked among the most educated (ISCED 6-8) from 46 hours per week to 43 hours. Indeed by 2022 there is little difference between hours worked of men across education. On the other hand, the education gap among women widened after the Great Recession from the decline among the least skilled workers, though the latter group regained some ground in the post-COVID recovery of 2022.
Figure 15. Mean weekly hours worked among employees, by sex and education, over time

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60.
Taking a series of meaningful snapshots, we aim to understand the changes in hours worked over various time periods in Figure 16. The figure presents total growth rates in hours worked across ventiles of the hourly wage distribution for workers aged 25-60. We select those workers whose hourly wages lie between the 1st and 99th percentiles, and in constructing growth rates we take
3-year means to further minimise noise. With the exception of the 1979-1995 window, men have exhibited little growth in hours worked across the wage distribution, and in the latter case this was only among men in the top half of the wage distribution. During that same period women's hours grew by 5% over most of the distribution, but otherwise the growth of female hours resembled that of men. The one exception is the 1993-95 to 2004-06 series that features substantial hours growth across the lower ventiles of the wage distribution. This period coincides with broad-based economic growth, and expansions in refundable tax credits that lead to reduced poverty and higher work participation among relatively lower-income women. A series of robustness versions of Figure 16 are presented in the Appendix (Figures 49-51), where we widen the age of the sample (25-74) and where we trim or leave untrimmed the top and bottom 1% of the hourly wage distribution. In general, the patterns in the main text are little changed with the expanded age or wage sample.



Figure 16. Growth in mean hours worked among employees by wage ventile, overall and by sex, selected years
Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60. We trim the bottom and top 1% of the gender specific wage distribution. We average mean hourly wage for each year across the three years to obtain hourly wage for each 3-year period.
4.4 Inequality in individual earnings among those in work
In Figure 17, we move to documenting trends in individual median earnings by sex from 1975 to 2022. The sample is of 25-60-year-old workers who are in either paid employment or self- employment. The figure shows that real earnings of men peaked around $60,000 in the late 1970s, and then oscillated between $50,000 and $55,000 in the last four decades, rising and falling with business-cycle expansions and contractions. Women experienced steady growth in real earnings from the mid-1970s to 2000, before plateauing for a decade and then resuming the upward march. The gender earnings gap was $30,000 in the mid-1970s and this narrowed substantially to about $11,000 by 2022, demonstrating real progress of women at the median.

Figure 17. Median real gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices.
Further disaggregating the results by sex and education in Figure 18, we find substantial, but narrowing, earnings gaps across educational attainment and sex. Men and women with fewer formal educational credentials show convergence in earnings, with male earnings falling towards those of females in ISCED 0-2. There is also some male-female convergence among highly educated workers (ISCED 6-8), with women experiencing real growth of $20,000 from 1975 to 2022, while their male counterparts experience negligible growth over the same period. Still, the overall picture is one of divergence within gender: non-college-educated workers in the US do not make progress over this period, with men experiencing a reduction in real earnings over time.
Figure 18. Median real gross individual earnings, by sex and education, over time

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60. Gross earnings are in 2019 prices.
We move on to looking at earnings inequality using the Gini coefficient in Figure 19, overall and by sex (see Figure 52 in the Appendix for an expanded age range of 25-74). In this case, we uncover that lower median earnings among women relative to men potentially mask higher within-group earnings inequality among women when compared to men, at least in the first two decades of the sample period. The gender inequality gap is highest in the mid-1970s, and steadily converges by the mid-1990s. The source of this convergence is not a large-scale reduction in earnings



inequality among women, but instead high and rising earnings inequality among men.1 This is certainly coincident with skill-biased technological change in the economy and the decline in many 'blue-collar' employment opportunities that provided relatively competitive compensation packages for workers with fewer formal credentials.
Figure 19. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.
Compensation packages entail more than earnings, and it is important to incorporate other employer costs within our assessment of inequality. We do so in Figure 20 by adding the employer cost of the payroll tax to gross earnings. There we find that there is some modest divergence in inequality between individual earnings and employer costs over time. Still, both series rise only slightly from the 1960s.
Figure 20. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings and total employer cost, over time

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.

1  The Census Bureau top-codes earnings and income values prior to public release, and indeed also top-codes the data (albeit at higher values) in restricted-access internal versions. Although we use rank-proximity swap values provided by the Census Bureau for a consistent method of top-coding across the sample period, there was a data collection and processing change in 1993 (1994 survey year) from paper survey to computer-assisted survey that enabled the use of higher internal top codes, rising from $299,999 to $1,099,999. This results in a jump discontinuity in the Gini in 1993 when not winsorising the data.

We now turn to assessing inequality between the top and the bottom (90:10, left-hand axis) and also between the middle and the bottom of the earnings distribution (50:10, right-hand axis).
Secular accounts of rising inequality are accounted for when we observe the case for men. Here, 90:10 inequality is on the rise since 1980, though the 50:10 ratio has been flat over that same period. On the other hand, female earnings inequality declined from a very high level in the mid- 1970s. By the mid-2000s and onward, the inequality series run fairly close together across gender. For both men and women the onset of COVID-19 saw a sharp increase in both upper- and lower-tail inequality in 2020, only to be followed by a sharp reduction in 2022, bringing male 90:10 earnings inequality on par with levels last seen in 2000. Indeed, female earnings and the combined distribution saw the lowest rate of upper-tail inequality in 2022 compared to the five decades of our sample.

Figure 21. 90:10 and 50:10 ratios of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.
Earnings growth, when conditioned on position in the earnings distribution, takes on distinct forms for men and women. In Figure 22 we depict total growth in earnings of men and women across the distribution for selected periods. For both men and women, the late 1970s were a period of no earnings growth across the distribution. Over the next 15 years, however, women had very strong earnings growth across the distribution, while men experienced negative growth in the bottom 70% of the distribution. The situation was notably improved for men between 1993 and 2006 with positive growth across all percentiles, albeit at modest levels from the 25th to 75th percentiles. Earnings growth of women continued to exceed that of men. The subsequent dozen years until 2018 saw earnings growth rates of men return to near zero, and levels not much better for women in the upper half of the earnings distribution but with strong growth in the bottom half.
In Figure 23 we repeat the exercise but now pool genders to examine total growth in the overall labour market, both in direct wage payments and with the broader compensation index that includes employer cost of the payroll tax. The combined earnings growth is a weighted average of the series in Figure 22, and as such each panel is similar, though the negative growth among men in the 1979-93 period is masked in the pooled sample. Adding in employer payroll tax cost has no substantive effects on growth rates, which is perhaps not surprising since it is a flat tax over the wage distribution in the US (with the retirement portion capped but the Medicare portion uncapped after 1991). Figure 53 in the Appendix shows that these patterns do not change when we expand the age range to 25-74.



Figure 22. Growth in gross earnings by earnings percentile, overall and sex, selected periods

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.
Figure 23. Growth in gross earnings and employer cost by earnings percentile, selected



periods
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.

4.5 Self-employment
Figure 24 documents the proportion of workers who are considered self-employed at any time in the prior year versus employees of firms - which has been the standard arrangement for most US workers. The self-employed group is further disaggregated into those who are solely self- employed and those who both work for an employer and also do self-employment work. The data suggest that the overall level of self-employed workers is fairly stable and, if anything, even gently declining since the mid-1990s. Figure 54 in the Appendix shows that this pattern is unchanged if we use self-employment status as of the survey week instead of in the prior year.
Figure 24. Share of employees and self-employed workers, over time

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.
The overall flat trend in self-employment masks important heterogeneity across sex and education. Men with less education have increased their participation in self-employment since the early 2000s, which is consistent with growth in the contingent workforce (e.g., low-wage gig economy), whereas men and women with higher educational credentials (ISCED 6-8) have decreased their participation in self-employment since 1987. In general, self-employment is in decline for all groups shown except - as described previously - for men in ISCED category 0-2 and women of the same educational category whose self-employment rate has held steady around 5%.



Figure 25. Share self-employed by sex and education, over time

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.
Figure 26 demonstrates that self-employment involves vastly different occupations and returns, depicting the share self-employed across ventiles of the earnings distribution. The figure shows a U-shaped pattern with self-employment rates highest at low earnings, but the U-shape has flattened out over time to become more L-shaped in recent years. The figure also shows that while self-employment has decreased since 1987, the post 1999 stability seen in Figure 24 pervades most of the earnings distribution.
Figure 24. Share self-employed by ventile of individual earnings, selected years

Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.

5. Labour market institutions
This section looks at labour market institutions that affect earnings and incomes: minimum wages and collective bargaining, and benefits from the state. As in most of the report, all analysis is restricted to individuals aged 25-60.
5.1 Minimum wage and unions
Figure 27 shows the share of the non-self-employed workforce since 1979 whose hourly pay falls below 120% of the federal minimum wage (left-hand axis) and the generosity of the federal minimum wage vis- -vis the median hourly after-tax wages and hourly gross labour cost (right- hand axis). There is substantial volatility in the series depicting the proportion of workers below 120% of the minimum wage based on periodic upward adjustments in the federal minimum wage; still, the proportion falls over time from 19% in 1979 to approximately 4% by 2022. The series on the right-hand axis shows that the ratio of the minimum wage to the 50th percentile of the net wage distribution falls from nearly 0.75 in 1979 to 0.4 by 2022. Accounting for payroll tax labour costs (yellow trend), the minimum wage likewise falls from 0.45 to 0.25 of gross labour cost.
Taken together, this suggests that the real value of the minimum wage has severely eroded over the past four decades, and that employers have had to steadily increase their internal wage floors above and beyond the federal level to attract and retain workers.
Figure 27. Bite of the minimum wage, over time

Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60. The figure presents the share of workers with a wage below 1.2 times the minimum wage (left-hand side). The right-hand side shows the ratio
of the minimum wage to the median wage for the net wage and the labour cost.

Worker earnings are generally higher when covered by a union bargaining agreement, whether or not the individual is a dues-paying member of the union. Figure 28 presents trends in the share of individuals belonging to a union (union density) and the share covered by a collective bargaining agreement. In the late 1970s just over one in five workers belonged to a union and one in four were covered by collective bargaining. Over the ensuing four decades the shares of each group fell by half to about 10%. This decline has been attributed to some of the wage losses of
low- and medium-skilled men over this period.



Figure 28. Union density and fraction of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements, over time
Note: Sample is individuals 25-60 years of age.
5.2 Benefits from the state
The next series of figures present evidence on the generosity of the tax, transfer and social insurance system in redistributing income towards lower-income households. Each figure sums up income and tax payments to the household level and splits the sample based on the quartile of the equivalised disposable (net) income distribution in each year.
Figure 29 presents the share of gross income received in the form of non-tax benefits. In this case benefits include social insurance such as Social Security, SSDI , UI, Workers' Compensation, and Veterans Benefits, and means-tested transfers such as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, Supplemental Security Income, and SNAP. Gross income includes earnings and non- labour income, the latter of which is inclusive of benefits. The figure shows that safety net benefits flow primarily to low-income households - accounting for 20-30% of gross income in the first quartile - and there is a strong countercyclical component to assistance. The latter is expected as it reflects programmes such as UI and SNAP that are automatic stabilisers that support households during economic downturns, as well as direct Congressional action during severe downturns such as the Great Recession and COVID-19 pandemic. There is also a slight upward drift in the share of income in the first quartile in the form of transfers, driven in part from the strong uptick and long recovery from the Great Recession. Benefits that flow to the second, third and fourth quartiles of the net income distribution are primarily from social insurance (notably UI), and consequently a much smaller share of household net income.
Figure 30 offers a different look at redistribution through the tax code, depicting average tax rates by quartile of the equivalised disposable income distribution. Average tax rates are defined as the ratio of average total tax payments (inclusive of refundable tax credits like the EITC and CTC) to average gross income within each quartile, where gross income is defined as in Figure
29. Average tax rates trended downward for the bottom three quartiles, especially the first quartile starting in the mid-1990s with the expansion of the EITC. Average burdens actually fell below zero during the Great Recession, and then plummeted to nearly -20% in the COVID-19 pandemic with the Economic Income Payments in 2020 and then the broad expansion of the CTC in 2021. With their expiration, average tax rates in the first quartile returned to a positive 2.5% in 2022, the highest rate since 2002.

Figure 29. Benefits as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile


Note: Sample is individuals 25-60 years of age.

Figure 30. Tax payments as a proportion of gross income, by net household income quartile
Note: Sample is individuals 25-60 years of age.
In the next two figures we present a related portrait of the total take of the tax system by plotting the ratio of disposable net income to gross income in Figure 31 and the ratio of disposable income to gross income inclusive of employer payroll tax cost in Figure 32. Both figures reveal that since the early 1980s disposable income as a share of gross income has increased sharply in the bottom half of the distribution, even prior to the unprecedented increase during the COVID period, rising from 90% to 100% in the first quartile and from 80% to 90% in the second quartile. Adding in employer payroll tax cost has no effect on trends, but reduces the disposable income share by 3-5 percentage points in a typical year.



Figure 31. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income, by net household income

quartile
Note: Sample is individuals 25-60 years of age.

Figure 32. Disposable income as a proportion of gross income plus employer payroll cost, by net household income quartile
Note: Sample is individuals 25-60 years of age.

6. Household incomes
This section takes a deeper look at household composition and incomes. We start by looking at trends in household composition and the degree of assortative matching, which partly determine household earnings. We then compare trends in household earnings and household disposable income for working households, drawing out the role of the tax and transfer system over time.
Finally, we show a set of charts on trends in household income inequality across all households (including those where no one is in work).
6.1 Trends in household composition
One feature of US inequality is the changing structure of families. Families are increasingly more complex, and marriage rates overall have been on the decline, though as depicted in Figure 33 cohabitation (which is collected starting in 1994) slowed down some of that decline. One fact that emerges from the figure is that marriage and cohabitation have increasingly become the domain of highly educated adults; there is a roughly 15 percentage point difference in marriage and cohabitation rates between college-educated adults (ISCED 6-8) and those with less than a college degree by 2022. Omitting cohabitation exacerbates the marriage education gap by an additional 5 percentage points.
Figure 33. Share married/cohabiting, overall and by education, over time



Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Prior to 1994 only married persons are included. There was a change in measuring cohabitation in 2006.

Reinforcing the findings of Figure 33, we find a very clear income gradient between marriage and cohabitation and earnings in Figure 34, though operating in opposing directions. Marriage and cohabitation rates for women are decreasing as their individual earnings rise in 1975, are relatively flat across the earnings distribution in 1993 and gently rising in 2018. Men's marriage and cohabitation rates rise with their individual earnings in all three periods depicted. Moreover, working men are more likely to have a working partner as we move up the earnings distribution, which we explore further below. This is suggestive of some asymmetry in the economic status of men and women within marital and cohabitation arrangements. The marital and cohabitation rates of women who do not work are relatively high in 1975, though these marital/cohabitation rates fall 10 percentage points over time (a 20 point decline if only include married women in 2018). Men's marital and cohabitation rates among those who are out of work are, conversely, lower than those of men who work at any point in the income distribution. The sample here trims the top and bottom 1% of the gender-specific earnings distribution. In Figure 55 in the Appendix, when we do not trim and retain zero earners, we see that this does not alter the slope of the series but it does alter the intercept as we do not enter positive wages until later in the distribution. Because of increases in women's employment, this falls from the 45th percentile in



1975 to the 25th percentile in 1993. At the same time, because of withdrawal from work among men, we move from the 6th percentile in 1975 to the 16th percentile in 2018.

Figure 34. Share married/cohabiting and share with working partner, by sex and individual gross earnings percentile, selected years















Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. We exclude the bottom and top 1% of the gender-specific earnings distribution. The proportion with a working partner is conditional on being married. The 2018 series includes cohabiting partners.

Do marriages and partnerships follow or diverge from assortative mating patterns over time? We explore this question in Figure 35, which depicts within each gender's earnings distribution where the earnings of the partner fall in their respective distribution. What becomes apparent from the figure is that over time the partner's earnings profile becomes steeper, which is consistent with assortative mating - high-wage men and women are partnering with high-wage partners. The transformation among women is quite dramatic as the pattern evolves from a symmetric U-shape in the mid-1970s with a strong leftward shift in the distribution in the mid- 1990s and a further shift left in the late 2010s. No less dramatic is the change among men. In the 1970s the profile was an inverse U-shape, suggesting that high-earning men were more likely to partner with lower earners, perhaps working only part-time. By 2016-18 the profile is monotonically increasing after the 15th percentile of male earnings, suggesting that assortative matching spans the entire distribution. As in Figure 34, when we do not trim out the top and bottom 1% (see Figure 56 in the Appendix) then the slopes are the same, demonstrating an

increase in assortative matching over time, but again the series begins higher up in the distribution in earlier periods because of the prevalence of non-working women in the 1970s, and of non-working men in the 2010s.
Figure 35. Mean gross earnings percentile of partner/spouse by individual's gross earnings percentile, selected years
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. We exclude the bottom and top 1% of the gender-specific earnings distribution. Mean earnings of partners are plotted as five-pt moving averages across the earnings distribution. Partners include both married and cohabiting persons in 1993-95 and 2016-18, but only married persons in 1975-77.

The next two figures shed light on the composition of households, including marital status by presence of dependent children, adult children, and other related or unrelated persons. Figure 36 decomposes households into the share of members by composition type, the latter of which in turn is determined by relationship to the household head. The figure shows that there has been a trend decline in the share of household members residing in a couple household with dependent children, only to be offset by a rise in the share of single-person households, childless couples, and of other household members. Figure 37 separates the figure by sex and education, where we see that among lower-educated women there is a higher share of persons residing in single- person households with children over time. Among low- and middle-education men there is a notable decline in residing in couples with children, and while there has been an increase in lone parenthood in these groups, much of the shift has been towards single-person households, childless couples, or adult children or 'other' members residing in the wider household. These men tend to have weaker labour force attachment, and when working, with lower earnings, each of which likely contribute to widening household inequality.



Figure 36. Share of individuals by position in the household, over time

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. 'Single, children' and 'couple, children' refer to dependent children only. Couples include cohabiting partners after 1993. There was a change in measurement of cohabitation in 2006.
Figure 37. Share of individuals by position in the household, by sex and education, over time




Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. 'Single, children' and 'Couple, children' refer to dependent children only. Couples include cohabiting partners after 1993. There was a change in measurement of cohabitation in 2006.

6.2 Earnings and incomes among working households
The share of individuals in a working household as seen in Figure 38 held steady at nearly 90% of the adult population for the 25 years from 1975 to 2000, before declining steadily over the next 15 years, only to recover slightly by 2022. Individuals with fewer formal educational credentials are less likely to reside in a household where at least one adult is working. This is most pronounced for those individuals without a high school diploma (ISCED 0-2) where the share declines by nearly 15 percentage points from 80% to 65%, and increasingly so for those with high school or some college (ISCED 3-5) where the share fell from 90% in 2000 to 80% two decades later. And as the labour market changes and skill-biased technological changes shift the composition of job opportunities - including a hollowing out of blue-collar, middle-skill jobs - the linkage between higher education and work sharpens. Importantly, though, much of the COVID-induced decline in working households recovered in 2022
Figure 38. Share of individuals in a working household, overall and by education, over time

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work.
Work is a clear pathway out of poverty, and Figure 39 reveals that median real equivalised disposable household income is noticeably lower among households that are out of work. Earnings growth occurs among households with at least one worker throughout the 1980s, the mid-1990s to the early 2000s, and then after 2014, with median earnings increasing by 42% over the last 45 years. Disposable income among working households grows even more than earnings, in part because of robust redistribution via refundable tax credits depicted previously. However, there is a remarkable decline for working households in 2022 with the expiration of the expanded CTC and CDCTC credits. For those prime-age households with no workers, median equivalised net income rebounded from lows of about $13,000 in the early 1990s to a within- period peak in 2021, only to fall back in 2022 to the level in 1980.



Figure 39. Median real gross household earnings and disposable household income, by household (HH) working status, over time
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Figure 40 reveals that income and earnings growth was fairly slow across the economic distribution. Still, contemporary income and earnings growth or stagnation in the US context depends on where households lie along the distribution. Households at the middle and upper ends of the distribution experience positive income and earnings growth, albeit at a fairly slow rate of about 1% per year. Households below the middle of the distribution are much more likely to experience some real decline in both earnings and income from 1979 to 1993, but then growth of about 0.5-1.0% thereafter.
Figure 40. Annualised growth in real equivalised gross household earnings and household disposable income for working households, by percentile, selected years
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60 in working households. A working household is defined as a household in which at least one adult is in work. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
6.3 Inequality in incomes among all households
Figure 41 sheds further light on the evolution of household disposable incomes beyond Figure 39, both overall and with households separated by education attainment. Here it is clear that growth in after-tax and transfer incomes in the middle of the distribution has only occurred among those with college credentials (ISCED 6-8), where equivalised net income increases by one-third from

roughly $45,000 to nearly $60,000. For those with lower education credentials median net incomes have been remarkably flat for nearly five decades outside some undulations with the business cycle, including the COVID-19 pandemic that briefly lifted median disposable incomes. However, because of the secular upgrading of formal education credentials the overall median of equivalised disposable incomes increased by one-third along with the upper-education group.
Figure 41. Median real disposable household income for all households, overall and by education, over time
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. Incomes are in 2019 prices and have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Inequality is rising throughout the US economy, and this is shown in Figure 42 using four metrics of inequality in equivalised net incomes: Gini inequality (index times 100); a winsorised version of the Gini; relative poverty, defined as the share of households with incomes less than 60% of the median; and the share of overall income held by the top 1%. The Gini coefficient indicates disposable income inequality rising by 30% from 0.30 to 0.39. When we winsorise the data by censoring the top at the 99th percentile and the bottom at 0 (i.e., anyone with incomes above the 99th is assigned the 99th value and anyone with negative disposable incomes is assigned 0), we see some decline in the levels as expected, though the Gini is still rising just as much from 0.29 to
0.38. Figure 42 also shows that relative poverty deteriorates over the sample period, increasing from 20% to about 25%. Notably both the Gini and relative poverty fell in 2020 and 2021 with the expansions of refundable tax credits and Economic Impact Payments, but then returned to trend in 2022 when the extra payments expired. The figure reveals that the top 1% share rises sharply from 4% to over 6% from 1993 to 1994 and is stable thereafter. As explained in footnote 1, the jump in 1994 is an artefact of a data processing change. In Figure 57 in the Appendix we present the top 1% share for alternative income concepts ranging from individual earnings to household gross income and disposable income, with and without equivalising. There we see the top 1% share of around 10% of individual earnings since the mid-1990s, 8% for gross income, and 6% for disposable income. This decline reflects the progressive tax and transfer system in the US. We also show a top 1% share of equivalised disposable income based on the winsorised distribution, which admittedly defeats the purpose of documenting top income shares, but it avoids the change in top-coding in the early 1990s. While the levels are notably lower, the top 1% share still increases by 44% from 1975 to 2022. We also note that these levels are lower than what is found in tax data, but the shares are not directly comparable because the tax share is based solely on the population of tax filers, and also does not capture most income transfers, which are not taxable in the US.



Figure 42. Gini, relative poverty and top 1% share of net household income for all households, over time
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The Gini inequality index is multiplied by 100. The relative poverty rate is defined as the proportion of people living in households with less than 60% of contemporaneous disposable median income. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.
Figure 43 takes an alternative look at inequality, showing upper- and lower-tail inequality of disposable incomes by taking ratios at the 90th, 50th, and 10th percentiles. These are unlikely to be affected by changes in top-code procedures that may impact the top 1% share. 90:10 inequality is rising consistently since at least 1980, though with a sharp decline from 2020 to 2021 and rebounding in 2022. This temporary decline in 90:10 disposable income inequality is likely due to aggressive fiscal policy expansions and a tight labour market amid the COVID-19 pandemic.
Notably, rising 90:10 inequality from 1980 is mostly driven by an increase in upper-tail 90:50 inequality.
Figure 43. Percentile ratios of disposable household incomes for all households, over time

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. All incomes have been equivalised using the modified OECD equivalence scale.

7. Immigrant outcomes
We conclude our main analysis with a brief examination into the evolution of immigration in the United States, and the associated outcomes relative to native-born persons. The CPS ASEC did not start collecting information on immigration status until the 1994 survey year, and thus we are not able to speak to changes since the mid-1970s like the other outcomes in the analysis.
Figure 44 depicts the share of persons aged 25-60 born outside of the United States, who predominantly hail from Central and South America. The share has nearly doubled over the past three decades from just over 11% in 1993 to 20% in 2022. Figure 45 further shows that this growth in immigration has occurred throughout the disposable income distribution, albeit at higher rates in the bottom quartile. This suggests that immigration per se is unlikely to be a main driver of overall rising inequality, though it may have contributed to changes in the income distribution in the lower tail.
Figure 44. Share of immigrants in population, over time


Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.
Figure 45. Share of immigrants in population, by disposable income distribution over time

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.



Lastly, in Figure 46 we present various outcomes of immigrants relative to the native-born population by sex and selected years. These are measured by normalising each outcome by the respective outcome among native-born persons. Among women, immigrants are less likely to be highly educated (ISCED 6-8), to be employed, to work as many hours, and to have similar earnings. For men, however, the share highly educated is similar; immigrants are more likely to be employed and to work as many hours, though their earnings fall substantially below those of native-born men. However, male immigrant earnings did improve relative to natives between 2007 and 2019, and thus we do observe some improvement in disposable household incomes, though they still fall below 80% of native-born net incomes. This likely stems from lower employment among female immigrants, lower wages for both male and female immigrants relative to native-born, and the fact that some immigrants (undocumented, legal recent arrivals) may not be eligible for certain transfer programmes and tax credits.
Figure 46. Outcomes of immigrants relative to native-born population, by sex and over time

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60.

8. Appendix
In this Appendix we present selected figures using alternative samples and measures such as survey week employment in lieu of employment in the prior year, or charts using untrimmed samples instead of trimming the top and bottom 1% of the outcome distribution. In most cases the sample used is persons aged 25-74, instead of 25-60 in the main text.

Figure 47. Employment rates by age and sex, over time - using survey week employment

Note: Sample is individuals aged 16-74.


Figure 48 Growth in hourly wages among employees by wage percentile, by sex, selected periods - 25-74 age group
Note: Sample is employees aged 25-74.






Figure 49. Growth in mean hours worked among employees by wage ventile, overall and by sex, selected years - untrimmed



Note: Sample is employees aged 25-60. The gender specific wage distributions are untrimmed. We average mean hourly wage for each year across the three years to obtain hourly wage for each 3-year period.

Figure 50. Growth in mean hours worked among employees by wage ventile, overall and by sex, selected years - 25-74 age group
Note: Sample is employees aged 25-74. We trim the bottom and top 1% of the gender specific wage distribution. We average mean hourly wage for each year across the three years to obtain hourly wage for each 3-year period.

Figure 51. Growth in mean hours worked among employees by wage ventile, overall and by sex, selected years - untrimmed, 25-74 age group


Note: Sample is employees aged 25-74. The gender specific wage distributions are untrimmed. We average mean hourly wage for each year across the three years to obtain hourly wage for each 3-year period.
Figure 52. Gini coefficient of gross individual earnings, overall and by sex, over time - 25-74 age group
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-74.




Figure 53. Growth in gross earnings by earnings percentile, overall and sex, selected periods - 25-74 age group
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-74.

Figure 54. Share of employees and self-employed workers, over time, using survey week employment
Note: Sample is individuals in work aged 25-60.

Figure 55. Share married and share with working partner, by sex and individual gross earnings percentile, selected years), untrimmed
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The gender-specific earnings distributions are untrimmed. The proportion with a working partner is conditional on being married. Cohabiting partners are included in the 1993-95 and 2016-18 series.



Figure 56. Mean gross earnings percentile of partner/spouse by individual's gross earnings percentile, selected years), untrimmed
Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The gender-specific earnings distributions are untrimmed. Mean earnings of partners are plotted as 5-pt moving averages across the earnings distribution. Cohabiting partners are included in the 1993-95 and 2016-18 series.

Figure 57. Top 1% share for alternative income definitions

Note: Sample is individuals aged 25-60. The top 1% share is computed by summing all income above the
99th percentile of the income-measure-specific distribution relative to total income in the population for the same Income measure. The winsorised share is based on the computing the top 1% share from the winsorised distribution.

What is inequality


BACK TO TOP (/EN/_SITE_IMF/TOPICS/INEQUALITY/INTRODUCTION-TO-INEQUALITY#TOP)



Inequality can be viewed from different perspectives, all of which are related. Most common metric is Income Inequality, which refers to the extent to which income is evenly distributed within a population. Related concepts are lifetime Inequality (inequality in incomes for an individual over his or her lifetime), Inequality of Wealth (distribution of wealth across households or individuals at a moment in time), and Inequality of Opportunity (impact on income of circumstances over which individuals have no control, such as family socioeconomic status, gender, or ethnic background). All of these inequality concepts are related and offer different yet complementary insights into the causes and consequences of inequality, hence providing better guidance to governments when designing specific policies aimed at addressing inequality.



How is Income Inequality measured


BACK TO TOP (/EN/_SITE_IMF/TOPICS/INEQUALITY/INTRODUCTION-TO-INEQUALITY#TOP)



Gini coefficient is a typical measure of income inequality. The coefficient varies between 0 and 1, with 0 representing perfect equality and 1 perfect inequality. Most of the analysis is centered on the concept of income inequality as captured by the Gini coefficient, which is available for a large number of countries and relatively long periods. Unless specified otherwise, Gini income inequality refers to disposable income or consumption and thus already reflects any redistribution through taxes and transfers.
FIGURE. GINI COEFFICIENT OF INEQUALITY




What Causes Inequality


BACK TO TOP (/EN/_SITE_IMF/TOPICS/INEQUALITY/INTRODUCTION-TO-INEQUALITY#TOP)



A range of global and domestic factors - which may reinforce each other - have been proposed in the theory and empirical literature to account for the income inequality trends. The key forces include the following:
& Global factors, such as technological progress, globalization, and commodity price cycles, play an important role. For instance, technological advancement has contributed to the skill premium, because individuals with higher education have a comparative advantage in using new technologies (Card and DiNardo, 2002). In Western Europe and the United States, technological progress has also translated into a hollowing out of middle-class jobs, a phenomenon known as job polarization (Goos and Manning, 2007).
& Country-specific factors, such as those related to economic developments and economic stability as well as to domestic policies - including financial integration, redistributive fiscal policies, and liberalization and deregulation of labor and product markets - also play an important role in explaining inequality trends within countries.



What are Consequences of Inequality


BACK TO TOP (/EN/_SITE_IMF/TOPICS/INEQUALITY/INTRODUCTION-TO-INEQUALITY#TOP)



While some inequality is inevitable in a market-based economic system as a result of differences in talent, effort, and luck, excessive inequality could erode social cohesion, lead to political polarization, and ultimately lower economic growth (Berg and Ostry, 2011; Rodrik 1999). But when is inequality excessive? There is no easy answer, but it will depend on several country-specific factors, including the growth context in which inequality arises, along with societal preferences.


Basic Facts About Income Inequality


BACK TO TOP (/EN/_SITE_IMF/TOPICS/INEQUALITY/INTRODUCTION-TO-INEQUALITY#TOP)



& Global inequality has been declining fast since 1990s. During the nineteenth and most of the twentieth centuries, global inequality increased dramatically, reflecting widening disparities between countries' per capita income as advanced economies took off

sharply compared with the rest of the world. The revival in global economic cooperation in the middle twentieth century ushered in an era of growth and development. Subsequently, per capita GDP growth rates accelerated in less developed countries, particularly in Asia, resulting in convergence in income levels across countries (Bourguignon, 2015). Millions of households were lifted out of poverty. As a result, the global income inequality first stabilized and then started to rapidly decline over the last three decades. However, it should be noted that not all regions of the world experience income convergences with more developed countries. In Sub-Saharan Africa, for instance, income growth on average was more modest than in Asia. Some gains in the reduction of global inequality are likely to be reversed as a result of the COVID-19 crisis. It will likely deteriorate global inequality because advanced economies, in general, have more resources to deal with the fallout from the pandemic and the ensuing recovery effort.
FIGURE. GLOBAL INCOME INEQUALITY (GINI COEFFICIENT)

Sources: Historical series are from Van Zaden and others (2014), who build on Bourgui- gnon and Morrisson (2002). Recent data is from Lakner and Milanovich (2013).
 Within-country inequality has risen in most countries. While the progress in the reduction of global inequality over the last thirty years has been remarkable, within country inequalities have increased, especially in advanced economies. Over the past three decades, more than half of the countries and close to 90 percent of advanced economies have seen an increase in income inequality, with some countries recording an increase in
their Gini coefficients exceeding two points. Some of key factors behind the increase in within-country income inequality noted in
the literature include technological progress, globalization, commodity price cycles, and domestic economic policies such as redistributive fiscal policies, labor and product market policies.
FIGURE. CHANGE IN INCOME INEQUALITY, 1985-2015 (PERCENT OF COUNTRIES)

Source: IMF, Fiscal Monitor, October 2017

 Rising social spending has been used to combat inequality. Fiscal policy is a key policy instrument available to governments to achieve their distributional objectives. In advanced economies, taxes and transfers decrease income inequality by one-third, with most of this being achieved via public social spending (such as pensions and family benefits) (Immervoll and rel="noopener noreferrer" others 2005
(https://www.google.com/url?
sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CB8QFjAAahUKEwjFgozrh_TGAhUH2T4KHWjXAXQ&url=http://ftp.iza.org/dp1824.pdf&ei=01ayVYXNN4ey-   wHoroegBw&usg=AFQjCNH4x6ZQkGpz9JQxyYMcEKg_7tSe0w&sig2=nlafHAfmkX5eoZWsa9dsQA&bvm=bv.98476267,d.cWw); Paulus and others 2009 (https://www.iser.essex.ac.uk/research/publications/working-papers/euromod/em8-09.pdf)). The extent of fiscal redistribution is even higher if the redistributive impact of in-kind spending rel="noopener noreferrer" (such as education rel="noopener noreferrer" and health) is
included (Paulus, Sutherland, and Tsakloglou, 2009 (https://www.iser.essex.ac.uk/research/publications/working-papers/euromod/em10-09.pdf)). Thus, it is important to ensure that social spending is adequate, effective and sustainable (https://www.imf.org/external/mmedia/view.aspx? vid=6048413670001). Progressive income taxes also play an important redistributive function in some countries. The lower redistributive impact of fiscal policy in developing economies is also a key factor behind their high levels of inequality.
FIGURE. REDISTRIBUTIVE IMPACT OF INCOME TAXES AND TRANSFERS, 2015 OR LATEST YEAR

Source: IMF Fiscal Monitor, October 2017.






IMF and Income Inequality


BACK TO TOP (/EN/_SITE_IMF/TOPICS/INEQUALITY/INTRODUCTION-TO-INEQUALITY#TOP)



Inequality is at the center stage of economic policy debate across the globe. A fair and equitable distribution of income is a fundamental element of the social contract. Macroeconomic policies (including government tax and spending policies) have significant effects on income distribution and that inequality can have adverse political and social consequences, with the potential to undermine macroeconomic stability and sustainable growth.
Inequality is thus, without any surprise, an important issue for the IMF in all three of its core activities:
(1) lending to support macroeconomic adjustment programs;
(2) macroeconomic surveillance, including related policy analysis; and
(3) technical assistance to build capacity, especially on government taxation and spending.
Historically, distributive issues have been an important part of the IMF's dialogue with member countries. Work on them has especially intensified in the wake of the global financial crisis that began in 2008.
IMF work on income inequality before the global financial crisis that began in 2008 was particularly influenced by the experience gained from IMF-supported programs. In practice, this experience led to greater attention to integrating social safety nets into adjustment programs and safeguarding access to basic public services in health and education. Other initiatives, such as the introduction of the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility in 1999, brought growth and poverty reduction objectives to the center of program design in low-income countries, as did the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries debt-relief initiative. IMF-supported programs were successful in raising social spending, including in comparison with similar countries without programs.
The IMF has further deepened its work on inequality issues in the years since the beginning of the global financial crisis. This effort has encompassed an expansion of both cross-country analytical studies and country-level assessments of fiscal consolidation and inequality, a variety of fiscal policy instruments to achieve equity goals in an efficient manner, and the macroeconomic gains from strengthening gender equity. An important lesson is that with the right design, government tax and spending policies can help achieve both stronger growth and greater equality of outcomes and opportunities. For example, boosting access to basic health and education services and reducing barriers to female labor market participation can help raise growth and meet equity objectives. Even in the design of fiscal consolidation, a number of options can help reduce budget deficits without aggravating inequality. These include measures to raise revenues from income taxes and targeted (rather than across-the-board) reductions in social benefits. Measures that are good for both equity and efficiency - for example, an increase in revenues from recurrent property taxation - should also be given strong consideration when designing fiscal consolidation packages.
The IMF will continue to strengthen its analytical work on income distribution issues. These efforts will involve further cross-country analysis on different aspects of macroeconomic policies and how they affect income distribution. Work at the country level on income distribution issues will also be deepened. The approach will be selective, and it will be concentrated on countries where these issues are critical. The IMF expects considerable synergies between country-level and cross-country analysis, and the IMF will continue to draw on the profession's work in these areas. In sum, the IMF will continue to deepen understanding of the nexus between income distribution and macroeconomics, with the goal of providing relevant policy advice.
With the expected increase in income inequality as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic the IMF's work on inequality issues is expected to become even more intense.


     





RESEARCH
Rising inequality: A major issue of our time
Zia Qureshi May 16, 2023


Income and wealth inequality has risen in many countries in recent decades. Rising inequality and related disparities and anxieties have been stoking social discontent and are a major driver of the increased political polarization and populist nationalism that are so evident today. An increasingly unequal society can weaken trust in public institutions and undermine democratic governance. Mounting global disparities can imperil geopolitical stability. Rising inequality has emerged as an important topic of political debate and a major public policy concern.


High and rising inequality


Current inequality levels are high. Contemporary global inequalities	are close to the
peak levels observed in the early 20th century, at the end of the prewar era (variously described as the Belle Époque or the Gilded Age) that saw sharp increases in global inequality.


Over the past four decades, there has been a broad trend of rising income inequality across countries. Income inequality has risen in most advanced economies and major emerging economies, which together account for about two-thirds of the world's population and 85 percent of global GDP (Figure 1). The increase has been particularly large in the United States, among advanced economies, and in China, India, and Russia, among major emerging economies.

Figure 1. Inequality has risen in most advanced and major emerging economies
Richest 10% income share, 1980-2020






(https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/Screen-Shot-2023-05-16- at-3.09.18-PM.png)






(https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/Screen-Shot-2023-05-16- at-3.09.42-PM.png)


Source: Author, using data from World Inequality Database	.
Note: Pre-tax national income. Some data points are extrapolated.


Beyond these groups of countries, the trend in the developing world at large has been more mixed, but many countries have seen increases in inequality. In regions such as Latin America, the Middle East and North Africa, and sub-Saharan Africa, income inequality levels on average have been relatively more stable, but inequality was already at high levels in these regions-the highest in the world.


Wealth inequality within countries is typically much higher than income inequality. It has followed a rising trend across countries since around 1980, similar to income

inequality. Higher wealth inequality capital income and inheritance.

feeds higher future income inequality through



The increase in inequality has been especially marked at the top end of the income distribution, with the income share of the top 10 percent (and even more so that of the

top 1 percent) rising sharply in many countries. This was so particularly up to the global financial crisis of 2008-09. Those in low- and middle-income groups have suffered a loss of income share, with those in the bottom 50 percent typically experiencing larger losses of income share. These trends in inequality have been associated with an erosion of the middle class and a decline in intergenerational
mobility	, especially in advanced economies experiencing larger increases in
inequality and a greater polarization in income distribution.


While within-country inequality has been rising, inequality between countries (reflecting per capita income differences) has been falling in recent decades. Faster- growing emerging economies, especially the large ones such as China and India, have been narrowing the income gap with advanced economies. Global inequality-the sum of within-country and between-country inequality-has declined somewhat since around 2000, with the fall in between-country inequality more than offsetting the rise in within-country inequality. As within-country inequality has been rising, it now accounts for a much larger part of global inequality (about two-thirds in 2020, up from less than half in 1980). Looking ahead, how within-country inequality evolves will matter even more for global inequality.

The interplay between the evolution of within-country inequality and between-country inequality, coupled with the differential growth performance of emerging and advanced economies, in recent decades presents an interesting picture of middle-
class dynamics at the global level (as depicted by the well-known "elephant curve	" of the incidence of global economic growth). It shows, for the period since 1980, a rising middle class in the emerging world and a squeezed middle class in rich
countries. It also shows an increasing concentration of income at the very top of the income distribution globally.


Drivers of rising inequality


Shifting economic paradigms (https://www.brookings.edu/book/shifting-paradigms/) are altering distributional dynamics. Transformative technological change, led by digital technologies, has been reshaping markets, business models, and the nature of work in ways that can increase inequality within economies. While the specifics differ across countries, this has been happening broadly through three channels: more unequal distribution of labor income with rising wage inequality as technology shifts

labor demand from routine low- to middle-level skills to new, higher-level skills; shift of income from labor to capital with increasing automation and a decoupling of wages from firm profitability; and more unequal distribution of capital income with rising market power and economic rents enjoyed by dominant firms in increasingly concentrated and winner-takes-all markets. These dynamics are more evident in advanced economies but could increasingly impact developing economies as the new technologies favoring capital and higher-level skills make deeper inroads there.


Globalization (international trade, offshoring) also has contributed to rising inequality within economies, especially in advanced economies by negatively affecting wages and jobs of lower-skilled workers in tradable sectors. These sectors increasingly extend beyond manufacturing as digital globalization expands the range of activities, including services, deliverable across borders.


In emerging economies, technology is reshaping how international trade affects national inequality. The new technologies, born in advanced economies, are shifting manufacturing and global value chains toward higher capital and skill intensity.
Leading manufacturing firms located in emerging economies and engaged in exporting are adopting these technologies in order to be able to compete, diminishing employment generation and wage growth prospects for less-skilled workers from this higher-productivity segment of industry in economies whose factor endowments would warrant less capital- and skill-intensive technologies-and thus limiting the potential of international trade to reduce inequality within these economies by boosting demand for their more abundant factor endowment (less-skilled workers).
Meanwhile, smaller firms that absorb most such workers in these economies remain engaged in low-productivity activities, many in the informal economy and in petty service sectors.


Globalization has been a force in recent decades for reducing inequality between economies by expanding export opportunities for emerging economies and spurring their economic growth. But globalization's role in promoting international economic convergence faces new challenges as technological change alters production processes and trade patterns (more on this below).


Other broad trends in recent decades affecting the distribution of income and wealth include changes in institutional settings such as economic deregulation, increasing

financialization of economies coupled with a high concentration of financial income and wealth, and erosion of labor market institutions such as minimum wage laws and collective bargaining. Moreover, the redistributive role of the state has been weakening with declining tax progressivity and with transfer programs facing the pressure of tighter fiscal constraints.


Role of public policy

Large and persistent increases in inequality within economies are not an inevitable consequence of forces such as technological change and globalization. Much depends on how public policy responds to the new dynamics that these forces generate. In the midst of these common forces of change, the rise in inequality has been uneven across countries. The difference lies largely in countries' institutional and policy settings and how they have responded. In general, looking across countries, public policy has been behind the curve. It has been slow to rise to the new challenges to promote more inclusive outcomes from economic change.


Public policy to reduce inequality is often viewed narrowly in terms of redistribution?taxes and transfers. This is indeed an important element, especially in view of the erosion of the state's redistributive role in recent decades. But there is a much broader policy agenda (https://www.brookings.edu/research/an-inclusive- future-technology-new-dynamics-and-policy-challenges/) of "predistribution" that can make the growth process itself more inclusive and produce better market outcomes-by promoting wider access to new opportunities for firms and workers and enhancing their capabilities to adjust as market dynamics shift.


This latter agenda of reforms spans competition policy and regulatory frameworks to keep markets competitive and inclusive in the digital age; innovation ecosystems and technology policies to put innovation to work for broader groups of people; digital infrastructure and literacy to reduce the digital divide; education and (re)training programs to upskill and reskill workers while addressing inequalities in access to these programs; and labor market policies and social protection systems to enable workers to obtain a fair share of economic returns and to support them in times of transition. In many of these reform areas, the new dynamics that economies are facing call for fresh thinking and significant policy overhaul.

Outlook for inequality

Absent more responsive policies to combat inequality, the current high levels of inequality are likely to persist or even rise further. Artificial intelligence and related new waves of digital technologies and automation could increase inequality further within countries. Even as new technologies increase productivity and produce greater economic affluence, and new jobs and tasks emerge to replace those displaced and so prevent large technological unemployment, inequality could reach much higher levels. The economic fallout of the COVID-19 pandemic (https://www.brookings.edu/research/tackling-the-inequality-pandemic-is-there-a- cure/) has reinforced some of the inequality-increasing dynamics. Also, a high and increasing concentration of wealth can exacerbate income inequality in a mutually reinforcing cycle.


Technological change also poses new challenges to global economic convergence that has reduced inequality between countries in the past couple of decades. Faster growth in emerging economies led by export of manufactures has depended greatly on their comparative advantage in labor-intensive manufacturing based on large populations of low-skill, low-wage workers. This source of comparative advantage increasingly will erode as automation of low-skill work expands. Emerging economies face the challenge of recalibrating their growth models as technology disrupts traditional pathways to growth and development.

Emerging economies' growth prospects	also face other headwinds, including the
scarring effects of the pandemic and global supply chain disruptions exacerbated by the war in Ukraine and an unsettled global geopolitical environment, which would hit the more trade-dependent economies harder. If growth in emerging economies falters, the decline in between-country inequality will slow, which could stall or even reverse the modest decline in global inequality observed since about 2000 if within-country inequality continues to mount.
Climate change is another factor that could worsen inequality within and between countries. Low-income groups and countries are more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and have less capacity to cope with them.
Conclusion
Income and wealth inequality is elevated. In the absence of policies to counter recent trends, inequality could rise to still higher levels. High and rising inequality entails adverse economic, social, and political consequences. Policymakers must pay more attention to the changing distributional dynamics in the digital age and harness the
forces of change for more inclusive prosperity. History
unabated rises in inequality can end up badly.
AUTHOR
tells us that large and Zia Qureshi Senior Fellow - Global Economy and Development  m-zia-qureshi
The Brookings Institution is committed to quality, independence, and impact.
We are supported by a diverse array of funders (/about-us/annual-report/) . In line with our values and policies (/about-us/research-independence-and-integrity-policies/) , each Brookings publication represents the sole views of its author(s).
Copyright 2026 The Brookings Institution
